SpaceX Satellite Policy Director: “ComCom’s Proactive and Progressive Approach Has Created a Favourable Environment for New Technologies”
 
SpaceX Satellite Policy Director Stephen Nelson spoke during the session titled “Strengthening the Region and Sustainable Digital Development,” which was organised by the Communications Commission at the Internet Governance Forum (IGF 2024). According to Mr. Nelson, Georgia has a strategic location in the region, making the country a natural logistics and transportation hub on the Trans-Caspian trade highway that connects the two continents. 

“Located at the crossroads of Europe and Asia, the country has become a natural link between the global East and West. Given its strategic location, Georgia has played the role of a conduit between regions throughout history, and today its geographical advantage is gaining new significance,” noted Stephen Nelson. 

According to Mr. Nelson, when it comes to Georgia's strategic position, one must highlight the innovative role of the Communications Commission as the first telecom regulator in the Caucasus region to license Starlink. As a result, Starlink managed to overcome the geographical obstacles to access to digital services in Georgia. 

“ComCom's proactive and progressive approach has created a favorable environment for new technologies such as Starlink, thereby enabling access to high-speed, low-latency internet connection for residents across the country. We will now give you some examples of how ComCom's regulatory vision and Starlink's technologies are being combined to create digital corridors in Georgia. In the highland villages of regions such as Svaneti and Tusheti, where people have suffered for decades due to lack of traditional telecom infrastructure, Starlink now provides internet speeds of 100-200 Mbps and latency of up to 20 ms,” Mr. Nelson stated, adding that Starlink is planning to create new business models in Georgia next year. 

“There are many more innovations to come in the future, from more efficient use of the spectrum to delivering speeds of up to 1 Gbps and low-latency internet. The combination of Georgia's rich heritage and strategic location, ComCom's innovative and flexible approach, and Starlink's advanced technology creates a strong foundation for sustainable development. The provision of high-speed, low-latency internet across Georgia creates new opportunities, which will take digital development in the region to a new level,” Stephen Nelson stated. 

During the session, Steven Nelson also explained the importance of digital corridors and how they contribute to the development of innovations: “These corridors serve as modern-day Silk Roads. They provide instant communication, promote cross-border cooperation, and democratise access to global knowledge and markets. Take the highland village of Ushguli, one of the highest settlements in Europe, for example. Traditionally, its population has been digitally isolated, having limited access to online education, telemedicine and economic opportunities. So, whether you're a businessman preparing a presentation, a student taking a class remotely, or just a dad who needs to keep his kids entertained on a long flight – Starlink allows you to stay connected and pass the time quickly,” Mr. Nelson explained. 

According to him, the aforementioned capabilities are not future aspirations. They are already available to Starlink users in many markets around the world. In close cooperation with ComCom, these technologies shall be introduced in Georgia in 2025.
