LAW OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Prom. SG. 88/7 Oct 2003, amend. SG. 19/1 Mar 2005

Chapter one

GENERAL

Art. 1. (1) This law settles the public relations regarding the telecommunications.

(2) Telecommunications are transfer, emission, transmission or receiving of signs, signals, written text, images, sound or communications of any kind through a conductor, radio waves, optic or other electromagnetic medium.

(3) Telecommunication activity is carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks an/or through providing telecommunication services.

Art. 2. The objective of this law is to provide preconditions for:

1. development of the telecommunication market, creation of conditions for equality of the operators and encouragement of the competition between them;

2. guaranteeing the freedom and confidentiality of the communications;

3. protection of the interests of the users of telecommunication services;

4. provision of a universal telecommunication service;

5. effective using of a limited resource;

6. protection of the public interest and providing the national security and the defence of the country.

Art. 3. The public relations regarding the telecommunications shall be settled by observing the following principles:

1. legal status;

2. effectiveness, transparency and equality;

3. predictability, proportionality and objectiveness;

4. public discussion;

5. bringing the regulatory impact to the necessary minimum.

Art. 4. The public relations regarding the telecommunications for civil purposes shall be regulated by the state through an independent specialised state body by the order of this law.

Art. 5. (1) This law shall not apply for the telecommunication activities for the own needs of the Ministry of defence, the Ministry of Interior, the National Guard Service and the National Intelligence Service, as well as regarding the interior distribution of the frequencies and the determination of the beckoning of their operative radio connections.

(2) The administrative bodies and services under para 1 shall use the public telecommunications and services by the order of this law.

Chapter two

MANAGEMENT OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Section I

General provisions

Art. 6. The management of the telecommunications shall be carried out by the Council of Ministers, by the Council for the national radio frequency spectrum and by the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Art. 7. (1) The Council of Ministers shall determine the state policy in the telecommunications by adopting a sector policy and promulgating it in the State Gazette.

(2) The sector policy shall contain the strategy, the principles and the stages of development of the telecommunications.

(3) The sector policy shall be updated periodically.

Art. 8. (1) The Council of Ministers shall adopt a state policy of planning and distribution of the radio frequency spectrum and shall promulgate it in the State Gazette.

(2) The Council of Ministers shall adopt a National Plan for distribution of the radio frequency spectrum to radio frequencies and radio frequency bands for civil needs, for the needs of the national security and the defence, as well as for joint using between them, and shall promulgate it in the State Gazette.

Section II

Council for the national radio frequency spectrum

Art. 9. (1) The Council for the national radio frequency spectrum at the Council of Ministers, called hereinafter "the Council", shall work out and, after a public discussion, shall propose for adoption by the Council of Ministers the state policy of planning and distribution of the radio frequency spectrum and shall implement it.

(2) Members of the Council shall be representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Transport and Communications, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Interior, the Commission for regulation of the communications, the National Guard Service and the National Intelligence Service.

(3) Chairman of the Council shall be the Minister of Transport and Communications or a person authorised by him. The state bodies and services under para 2 shall appoint their representatives and shall provide their participation in the work of the Council.

(4) The Council of Ministers shall adopt regulations for the activity of the Council at a proposal of its chairman.

(5) The administrative servicing of the Council shall be carried out by the administration of the Ministry of Transport and Communications.

Art. 10. (1) The Council shall work out a National Plan for distribution of the radio frequency spectrum to radio frequencies and radio frequency bands for civil purposes, for the needs of the national security and the defence, as well as for joint using between them.

(2) The interested state bodies shall coordinate between themselves the concrete distribution of the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands allocated for joint using for civil purposes, for the needs of the national security and for the defence. If a consent is not reached the issue shall be referred to the Council which shall propose to the Council of Ministers to take a decision.

(3) The Council shall consider issues related to the electromagnetic compatibility and, in the event of discord between the interested state bodies, shall propose to the Council of Ministers to take a decision.

Art. 11. (1) The Council, upon coordination with the interested state bodies, shall permit the using of concrete radio frequencies and radio frequency bands by radio equipments with their technical parameters, the term and the place of their using on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria by foreign countries, on the grounds of mutuality, as well as by international organisations, when it ensues from international obligations undertaken by the Republic of Bulgaria.

(2) In the cases of para 1 a request for using radio frequencies and radio frequency bands by foreign countries and international organisations shall be filed through the respective embassy or representation to the Council, which shall announce a decision on the request within a period not longer than one month.

(3) In the cases of para 1, where there is a stipulation for issuance of a licence by the order of this law, the Council shall notify the Commission for regulation of the communications which shall:

1. issue the respective licence;

2. collect the determined fees, unless an international act provides otherwise.

Section III

Minister of Transport and Communications

Art. 12. The Minister of Transport and Communications shall carry out the state policy in the telecommunications on the grounds of this law, of the sector policy and of the state policy of planning and distribution of the radio frequency spectrum.

Art. 13. (1) The Minister of Transport and Communications shall work out and present for adoption by the Council of Ministers the sector policy in the sphere of the telecommunications.

(2) The Minister of Transport and Communications shall publish an announcement in a national daily newspaper and in the Internet site of the Ministry of Transport and Communications for the worked out draft under para 1, indicating the place where the interested persons can obtain it and a period, not shorter than 30 days, within which they may file written statements.

Art. 14. (1) The Minister of Transport and Communications shall:

1. issue the by-laws stipulated by the law according to his competence;

2. store, with the obligation of confidentiality, samples of cryptographic keys in case of their using by telecommunication operators, under conditions and by an order determined by an ordinance adopted by the Council of Ministers;

3. take measures for providing the freedom and confidentiality of the telecommunications;

4. represent the Republic of Bulgaria in the international organisations in the sphere of telecommunications;

5. participate in the work of the international organisations for standardisation and in the technical committees for standardisation related to the telecommunications;

6. issue certificates of legal capacity of the radio operators of the air mobile radio service, the air mobile satellite service, the World Sea System for calamities and safety of the sea mobile radio service and the sea mobile satellite radio service, of radio operators of radio stations of vessels navigating in internal waterways;

7. carry out international registration of radio frequencies and radio frequency bands, as well as of radio equipments using them;

8. carry out international coordination of radio frequencies and radio frequency bands, as well as of the radio equipments using them for the needs of the national security and the defence and for the radio services – air mobile, air mobile-satellite, air radio-navigation, air radio-navigation-satellite, sea mobile, sea mobile-satellite, sea radio navigation and sea radio navigation-satellite;

9. appoint an official for keeping registers for the issues certificates under item 6, which shall be public.

(2) The Minister of Transport and Communications, before issuing the by-laws stipulated by this law, shall publish an announcement in a national daily newspaper and in the Internet site of the Ministry of Transport and Communications for the worked out drafts, indicating the place and the Internet site where the interested persons may obtain them and, within a period not shorter than 14 days they can file written statements on them. The Minister of Transport and Communications shall study the statements and shall accept them or shall motivate his decision for not accepting them.

Art. 15. The Minister of Transport and Communications shall carry out activities related to:

1. development of the telecommunications, information and communication technologies;

2. creation and development of the information society;

3. the European integration.

Section IV

Agency "Development of the communications and of the information and communication technologies"

Art. 16. (1) The activities of assisting the telecommunication and postal infrastructure and the information and communication technologies shall be carried out by the Minister of Transport and Communications through Agency "Development of the communications and of the information and communication technologies", called hereinafter "the Agency".

(2) The Agency is a corporate body at budget support and a seat in Sofia.

(3) The activity, the structure, the organisation of the work and the staff of the Agency shall be determined by structural regulations to be adopted by the Council of Ministers.

Art. 17. The resources for assisting the development of the telecommunication and postal infrastructure and the information and communication technologies shall be deposited to the budget of the Ministry of Transport and Communications and shall be raised from:

1. twenty five percent of the initial licence fees when the licence for telecommunication activity was obtained through a tender;

2. twenty five percent of the additional one-time fees for submitting additional radio frequency spectrum;

3. thirty five percent of the annual fees for using a radio frequency spectrum;

4. twenty five percent of the annual fees for using the positions of the geo-stationary orbit allocated for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements;

5. forty five percent of the licence fees and the fees for registration for postal services;

6. resources for co-financing of projects for development of the communications, the information and communication technologies;

7. donations;

8. interest;

9. other revenue.

Art. 18. (1) The resources under art. 17 shall be spent for:

1. projects and activities determined by the plans for regional development in the sphere of telecommunications, postal services, information and communication technologies;

2. telecommunication and postal projects and conferences, seminars, projects and other events and activities in the sphere of communications, information and communication technologies;

3. projects related to the management, the national security and defence of the country in the sphere of telecommunications;

4. scientific projects, studies and marketing for the purposes of the telecommunications, postal services, information and communication technologies;

5. release of radio frequency spectrum for civil purposes;

6. assisting projects and activities in the sphere of the information and communication technologies for the purposes of education and professional training;

7. activities related to the organisation and realisation of telecommunication and postal projects and projects in the sphere of the information and communication technologies;

8. support of the administration of the Agency.

(2) The spending of the resources for the activities under para 1, item 1, 2, 4, 6 and 7 shall be made by observing the principles of competitiveness, transparency and equality.

(3) The Agency shall work out an annual report for the spending of the resources under para 1, which shall be published by March 31 in the information bulletin and in the Internet site of the Ministry of Transport and Communications.

Chapter three

COMMISSION FOR REGULATION OF THE COMMUNICATIONS

Section I

Status and structure

Art. 19. (1) The Commission for regulation of the communications, called hereinafter "the Commission", is an independent specialised state body – a corporate body with a seat in Sofia.

(2) The Commission shall carry out the sector policy in the telecommunications, the state policy of planning and allocation of the radio frequency spectrum for civil purposes and the sector postal policy.

(3) The Commission shall regulate and control the telecommunications by the order stipulated by this law, as well as the providing of the postal services by the order determined by the Law of the postal services.

(4) The Commission shall register and control the activity of providing certifying cervices related to the electronic signature by the order determined by the Law of the electronic document and the electronic signature.

Art. 20. (1) The Commission is a college body consisting of five members, including chairman and deputy chairman.

(2) Members of the Commission may be only Bulgarian citizens with higher education and at least 5 years of service, of whom at least one qualified lawyer and one economist.

(3) The chairman of the Commission shall be appointed and released by a decision of the Council of Ministers and shall be employed by an order of the Prime Minister for a period of 5 years.

(4) The deputy chairman and two of the members of the Commission shall be appointed and released by a decision of the National Assembly for a period of 5 years.

(5) One of the members of the Commission shall be appointed and released by an edict of the President of the Republic of Bulgaria for a period of 5 years.

(6) The number of the consequent mandates shall not be more than two for all members of the Commission.

(7) The members of the Commission shall have all rights under legal terms of employment, except those which contradict or are incompatible with their legal application.

Art. 21. (1) The members of the Commission may not be sole entrepreneurs, owners, partners, stock-holders, managers (procurators), consultants or members of bodies of management of trade companies, state enterprises and non-profit corporate bodies in the sphere of telecommunications.

(2) The members of the Commission may not occupy another paid position in the sphere of telecommunications, as well as receive remuneration under a civil contract, except in the cases when they practice scientific or lecturing activity.

Art. 22. (1) The legal authorities of the members of the Commission shall be terminated upon death and by the respective bodies before the expiration of their mandate in the following cases:

1. on their written request;

2. on established incompatibility with the requirements of this law;

3. when sentenced to imprisonment for a deliberate crime of general nature;

4. for impossibility of fulfilment of the obligations for a period longer than three months.

(2) On termination of the legal authorities of a member of the Commission, within one month from the day of termination of the legal authority, the competent body shall appoint, elect or employ a new member until the expiration of the respective mandate.

Art. 23. The remuneration of the members of the Commission shall be determined as follows:

1. of the chairman – 95 percent of the basic remuneration of a national representative;

2. of the deputy chairman – 90 percent of the basic remuneration of a national representative;

3. of the rest of the members – 85 percent of the basic remuneration of a national representative.

Art. 24. (1) Every member of the Commission shall be obliged to disclose in writing before the Commission every substantial commercial, financial or other business interest which, he and/or members of his family will have in taking a concrete decision, and not participate in its consideration and voting.

(2) Substantial commercial, financial or other business interest shall be present always for the persons under para 1, as well as for persons with whom each of them is economically related when they apply for or obtain an individual licence or registration under a class licence under this law.

(3) On assuming office the members of the Commission shall file declarations stating the presence or the absence of the circumstances under para 1. The declarations shall contain the names and addresses of persons economically related to the members of their families, as well as the business interests which have occurred. The declarations shall be stored in a special public register of the Commission.

(5) The affected person, as well as any interested person, may request the Supreme Administrative Court to revoke, by the general order, decisions taken in violation of para 1.

(6) One year after the termination of the mandate the members of the Commission may not be owners, stock holders, partners, managers (procurators) or members of bodies of management of trade companies and state enterprises licensed under this law, as well as to exercise rights under licences, issued by the order of this law, as sole entrepreneurs.

Art. 25. The chairman of the Commission shall:

1. represent the Commission or shall authorise persons to represent it;

2. organise and manage the activity of the Commission;

3. set and chair sittings of the Commission;

4. conclude, amend and terminate the employment contracts with the employees of the administration;

5. control and be responsible for the fulfilment of the budget of the Commission;

6. inform the public for the activity of the Commission.

Art. 26. (1) The Commission shall be assisted by an administration in its activity.

(2) The Commission shall adopt regulations determining the structure, activity, the organisation of the work and the structure of the Commission and its administration, which shall be promulgated in the State Gazette.

(3) The basic monthly remunerations of the employees of the administration shall be determined by the chairman according to the internal rules for the salaries and the available resources of the budget of the Commission.

(4) The employees of the administration shall receive extra remuneration to their basic remuneration for fulfilment of specific functions under conditions and by an order determined by the internal rules for the salaries.

(5) The resources under para 4 shall be determined in a size of 25 percent of the gross annual size of the resources for salaries and shall be included in the budget of the Commission.

Section II

Legal capacity

Art. 27. The Commission shall:

1. carry out, jointly with the Council for Electronic Media, studies and shall submit to it information regarding the technical parameters necessary for the ground radio broadcasting of radio and television programmes to settlements, regions or the whole territory of the Republic of Bulgaria determined by the Council for Electronic Media, including free radio frequencies, admissible capacities of broadcasting, possible points of broadcasting, as well as other necessary technical information;

2. prepare the documents and carry out the necessary actions related to the issuance of the licences stipulated by this law and approve the obligatory documents stipulated by the law and/or the licences;

3. issue, amend, supplement, suspend, terminate and revoke individual licences for telecommunication activities;

4. issue, amend, supplement, suspend, terminate and revoke individual licences for telecommunication activities for telecommunications through ground digital radio broadcasting;

5. inform the Council for Electronic Media which will open a procedure by the order of the Law of the radio and television when the radio and television activity is carried out through ground digital radio broadcasting;

6. issue, amend, supplement, suspend, terminate and revoke individual licences for telecommunication activities for carrying out telecommunications through available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground radio broadcasting only upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media;

7. amend, supplement, suspend, terminate and revoke individual licences for telecommunication activities for carrying out telecommunications through available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground radio broadcasting on the grounds stipulated by art. 75, para 1, item 1 – 3, art. 77, para 1, art. 78 and 84;

8. issue class licences for telecommunication activities, register and write off their registration;

9. provide the necessary conditions for telecommunication activity for sea and air tracking and rescue and information for safety, including the provision of the necessary radio frequency spectrum, and issue the respective licences;

10. work out a regulatory policy of using numbers, addresses and names for carrying out telecommunications;

11. organise submitting by international organisations of numbers, addresses and names for the telecommunications in the Republic of Bulgaria;

12. work out the National Numbering Plan;

13. submits for using numbers, addresses and names to telecommunication operators by an order determined by an ordinance;

14. work out and present to the Minister of Transport and Communications draft normative acts stipulated by this law, to be issued according to his competence;

15. work out and present for adoption by the Council of Ministers draft normative acts stipulated by this law;

16. inform the public and carry out public consultations and discussions on important issues of the telecommunications;

17. determine and study the respective markets for the purpose of determining operators having a substantial impact on the market;

18. determine the operators having a substantial impact on the market and take decisions regarding the imposing of specific obligations for them stipulated by this law;

19. assign the providing of universal telecommunications service;

20. work out, jointly with the Council for Electronic Media, update and present for adoption by the National Assembly, a strategy for development of the radio and television activity through ground broadcasting.

Art. 28. (1) The Commission shall have the following legal authorities related to the management of the radio frequency spectrum:

1. manage the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs by:

a) working out the regulatory policy for its management;

b) work out and publish principles of its management and allocation;

c) submit for using radio frequencies and radio frequency bands to the telecommunication operators licensed by the order of this law;

d) approve, give prescriptions for amendment and supplement of technical projects or other obligatory documents which are an integral part of the individual licences;

2. carry out the international coordination of radio frequencies and radio frequency bands, as well as of radio facilities using them; the international coordination shall be carried out for all radio services, with exception of the air radio service and air satellite radio service;

3. carry out preliminary national coordination and synchronisation with all interested state bodies and departments the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands for civil needs, which are submitted by individual licences to public operators; carry out the national coordination of the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands and of the radio facilities for civil needs with all interested administrative bodies; the coordination shall be carried out for the purpose of providing the safety of the air and sea navigation; for protection of the national security the national coordination shall also be carried out with the bodies providing the national security and defence of the country;

4. prepare documents for registration in international organisations for telecommunications of the coordinated, for civil purposes, radio frequencies and radio frequency bands and radio facilities using them; the preparation of the documents regards all radio services with exception of the air mobile, air mobile satellite, air radio navigation, air radio navigation – satellite, air sea, air sea satellite, sea radio navigation and sea radio navigation – satellite; the documents for registration shall be submitted to the Ministry of Transport and Communications for international registration;

5. issue permits for legal capacity of radio operators – amateurs;

6. control the effective using of the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs and/or the sources of radio interference in the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs;

7. control the observance of the internationally determined procedural rules for the radio services;

8. allocate the distinction signs of the transmitting radio facilities of the amateur radio service;

9. provide conditions for telecommunication activity for the purposes of the sea and air tracking and rescue, as well as for broadcasting current information for providing the safety of the sea and air navigation and of the ground transport;

10. participate, jointly with the Minister of Transport and Communications, in the work of the international organisations, related to the management of the radio frequency spectrum;

11. work out draft ordinances determining procedural rules and technical parameters for the work of the radio services.

(2) In managing the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs the Commission shall observe the principles of transparency, equality and publicity.

Art. 29. The Commission is a national organisation for standardisation before the European Institute for Standardisation in the Telecommunications.

Art. 30. (1) The Commission shall keep registers for:

1. the issued individual licences;

2. the issued certificates for registration under a class licence.

(2) The registers under para 1 shall be public.

(3) The individual licences of the public operators shall be public with exception of the texts and the appendixes to the licences containing:

1. data related to the national security and the defence of the country;

2. technical data and parameters of the network;

3. financial information which is a commercial secret.

(4) Copies of the licences under para 3, with exception of the information under item 1 – 3, shall be submitted to the Commission against a paid fee for administrative service.

Art. 31. The Commission shall control the observance of:

1. the normative acts in the sphere of telecommunications;

2. the principles of price formation stipulated by this law;

3. the quality of the services;

4. the terms of the licences;

5. the requirements for providing universal telecommunication service according to this law.

Art. 32. (1) In fulfilment of the legal capacity under art. 31, item 4 the Commission shall carry out inspections regarding the fulfilment of the law and the terms of the licences, including on requests of persons affected by non-fulfilment of the terms of the licence regarding:

1. refusal to provide a specific access;

2. refusal to provide a unbundled access to a subscriber line;

3. refusal to provide the service "rented lines";

4. refusal to provide interconnection;

5. refusal of joint using of premises, telecommunication installations, channels, towers, etc.;

6. failure to fulfil the provisions of this law.

(2) When the inspection establishes a violation of the law or of the terms of the licence the Commission shall give a chance to the operator and to the persons affected by not meeting the terms of the licence, to present statements, and it may require further evidence where necessary. Taking into consideration the objective circumstances and the possibilities of the licensed persons the Commission shall give, by a decision, obligatory instructions for removal of the offence within a set period.

Art. 33. (1) The Commission may require from everyone carrying out telecommunication activities an information necessary for the fulfilment of its regulatory activities.

(2) The Commission shall interact with state bodies and institutions, as well as with the bodies of the local independent government and local administration and with non-profit corporate bodies in working out draft normative acts, exchange of information and other forms of cooperation.

(3) The members of the Commission and its administration shall be obliged to not make public the information obtained under para 1 when it is an official or commercial secret, for which they shall sign a declaration in a form adopted by a decision of the Commission.

Art. 34. (1) In exercising its legal capacity the Commission shall adopt motivated decisions.

(2) The decisions under para 1 shall be individual or general administrative acts and shall be subject to appeal before the Supreme Administrative Court.

(3) The general administrative acts shall be promulgated in the State Gazette.

Art. 35. (1) The Commission shall establish consultative structures in connection with the implementation of its legal capacities.

(2) The decision for establishing structures under para 1 shall determine their head and members, the order of carrying out their activity and their functions and tasks.

Art. 36. (1) The Commission shall carry out a procedure of public discussion with the interested persons in working out general administrative acts stipulated by this law, as well as on other issues of public importance for development of the telecommunications.

(2) Interested persons under para 1 are state bodies, branch organisations of telecommunication operators, organisations of users and telecommunication operators directly related to the developed project.

(3) The Commission shall discuss with the interested persons the basic principles underlying in the project, and it shall set a term for presentation of statements on it which shall not be shorter than 14 days.

(4) The Commission shall consider all statements received from the interested persons and shall motivate in writing their non-acceptance, publishing its motives in its Internet site.

Art. 37. The Commission shall represent the Republic of Bulgaria in international organisations of the regulatory bodies in the sphere of telecommunications.

Art. 38. (1) The Commission shall work out annually, and not later than the end of the second quarter of the next year shall submit to the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers and the Council for Electronic Media a report obligatorily containing:

1. analysis of the state of the universal telecommunication service in compliance with the requirements of the law;

2. distribution of the frequencies for civil needs in services and mechanisms for their effective using;

3. distribution of the numbers of the National Numbering Plan;

4. analysis of the market of telecommunication services and trends of development;

5. the results from the market study, carried out for the purpose of determining an operator having a substantial impact on the market;

6. state of the competition in the sphere of telecommunications and applying the principles of price formation stipulated by this law;

7. financial state and institutional development of the Commission and its administration.

(2) In working out the report under para 1, item 6 the Commission shall take the opinion of the Commission for protection of the competition.

(3) The Commission shall publish the report for its activity in its information bulletin and in its Internet site.

Section III

Financing

Art. 39. The Commission is a primary administrator of budget credits.

Art. 40. (1) The Commission shall administer the following revenue of its budget:

1. five percent of the initial licence fees when the licence for telecommunication activity has been obtained through a tender;

2. five percent of the additional one-time fees for submitting additional radio frequency spectrum;

3. forty percent of the annual fees for using a radio frequency spectrum;

4. of the annual fees for using numeration capacity;

5. five percent of the annual fees for using the positions of the geo-stationary orbit allocated for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements;

6. of the initial licence fees;

7. of the registration fees;

8. of the annual licence fees;

9. of the fees for amendment and supplement of the licences;

10. twenty percent of the fines and proprietary sanctions stipulated by this law;

11. of interest on overdue receivables;

12. of donations;

13. of the revenue from administrative services provided by the Commission.

(2) The resources of the budget of the Commission shall be spent for financing its activity, including projects related to the regulation and liberalisation of the market, for capital expenses, for providing effective and active control, for improvement of the material basis, for qualification and training.

Art. 41. The Commission shall work out and annually, by May 30, shall publish in its Internet site a project for the expected revenue under art. 40, para 1, item 1 – 7 and for the respective expenses for its activity for the next year, which shall be presented for coordination to the Minister of Finance.

Art. 42. (1) In the event that the expected revenue for the respective year does not cover the expenses for the activity of the Commission the difference shall be covered by annual licence fees for providing the regulation activities, paid by the public operators carrying out telecommunication activities on the grounds of individual licences.

(2) The size of the fees under para 1 shall be determined according to the expected revenue from the activities of the operators under para 1, proportionally allocated among them.

(3) The Commission, by September 30 of the current year, shall propose annually to the Council of Ministers to adopt the size of the fees under para 1, to be included in the Tariff for the fees collected by the Commission according to art. 224, para 1. The fees shall be collected from January 1 of the next year.

Chapter four

TELECOMMUNICATION OPERATORS

Section I

General provision

Art. 43. (1) The telecommunication operators are public and individual.

(2) Public operator is every person carrying out telecommunications through a public telecommunications network and/or carrying out telecommunications through providing telecommunications services on the grounds of an individual licence or registration under a class licence.

(3) Individual operator is every person carrying out telecommunications through an individual telecommunication network for own needs on the grounds of an individual licence or registration under a class licence.

Section II

Telecommunication operators having substantial impact on the market

Art. 44. (1) The Commission shall determined, by a motivated decision, that a public operator has a substantial impact on the market when the operator possesses a share, equal or larger than 25 percent, of the respective telecommunications market with a territorial range determined by his licence.

(2) The Commission may determine that an operator has a substantial impact on the market for a share less than 25 percent of the respective market.

(3) The Commission may determine that an operator has no substantial impact on the respective market for a share equal or larger than 25 percent of the respective market.

(4) The decision under para 2 or para 3 shall be based on:

1. an ability of the operator to have an impact on the respective market;

2. a size of the share of the realised turnover by the operator within the total volume of the respective market;

3. degree of impact of the operator on the accession devices to the end users;

4. access of the operator to financial resources and gathered experience in providing services on the respective market.

Art. 45. (1) The conditions and the order of determining operators having a substantial impact on the market, according to art. 44, shall be settled by a methodology to be worked out by the Commission, in coordination with the Commission for protection of the competition, and it shall be adopted by the Council of Ministers by a decree.

(2) Determined as operators having substantial impact on the market may be telecommunication operators under art. 44, carrying out telecommunications through:

1. fixed telephone networks and providing fixed voice telephone services;

2. providing service "rented lines";

3. mobile telecommunication networks and providing voice telephone services through them.

Art. 46. (1) The public operators shall submit to the Commission the necessary documents and information for determining operators having substantial impact on the market. The operators may not refuse the submitting of documents and information referring to official and commercial secret.

(2) The members of the Commission and its administration shall be obliged not to make public the information received according to para 1 if it represents an official or commercial secret, for which they shall sign a declaration in a form adopted by a decision of the Commission.

Art. 47. (1) The Commission shall impose to the operators having a substantial impact on the market obligations stipulated by this law, related to:

1. mutual connection;

2. providing service "rented lines";

3. providing specific access;

4. providing unbundled access to a subscriber line;

5. joint using of premises, telecommunication facilities, channels, towers, etc.

(2) The Commission may assign to the operators having substantial impact on the market an obligation for providing a universal telecommunication service.

Chapter five

CARRYING OUT TELECOMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES

Section I

General provisions

Art. 48. (1) Telecommunication activities shall be carried out freely – without individual licence and registration under a class licence when:

1. telecommunications are carried out through telecommunication networks for own needs without using a radio frequency spectrum;

2. telecommunications are carried out through radio facilities and networks by radio facilities for own needs by using a radio frequency spectrum for common using;

3. telecommunications are carried out by providing services using public telecommunication networks of operators licensed or registered under a class licence, and under the conditions of a real competition, whereas the life and health of people are not threatened by their providing, and preconditions are not created for the disruption of the entirety of the networks through which they are provided, and the interests of the users, the national security and the defence of the country are not threatened;

4. "Internet access" is provided.

(2) The conditions and the order of carrying out telecommunications under para 1, item 2 shall be determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Transport and Communications.

(3) The ordinance under para 2 may contain only requirements related to the preservation of the life and health of people and not creating interference in using the radio frequency spectrum.

Art. 49. (1) Telecommunication activities shall be carried out on the grounds of a registration under a class licence when telecommunications are carried out through:

1. a telecommunication network or radio facilities by using a radio frequency spectrum for common using, determined by the Commission;

2. providing a telecommunication service – access to satellite systems;

3. public telecommunication network without using a limited resource.

(2) Telecommunication activities shall be carried out on the grounds of individual licences when telecommunications are carried out through:

1. a telecommunication network with provided individually determined limited resource;

2. providing a fixed voice telephone service and/or universal telecommunication service;

3. air mobile radio service, radio location and radio navigation services for air traffic control and providing the air navigation servicing of the flights in the civil air space;

4. telecommunication network for providing the service "rented line", including international rented lines;

5. telecommunication networks for sea tracking and rescue and broadcasting current information for providing the safety of the sea navigation;

6. providing telecommunication services through a telecommunication network under item 5;

7. telecommunication network for tracking and rescue and broadcasting current information for providing the safety of the air navigation.

(3) The Minister of Transport and Communications shall determine by an ordinance the types of telecommunication activities subject to individual licensing and registration under a class licence.

Art. 50. (1) The requirements for issuance of individual licences shall be equal for all applicants for one and the same type of telecommunication activity.

(2) The issuance of individual licences shall be carried out under conditions of objectivity, equality and transparency.

Art. 51. (1) The number of operators shall not be restricted in issuing individual licences, unless the resource is limited.

(2) In cases of issuance of individual licences for using a limited resource under para 1 the Commission shall inform the public through one national daily newspaper and through its Internet site about the reasons requiring the restriction.

Art. 52. (1) The Commission shall issue individual licences for telecommunication activity by using available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground broadcasting only on the grounds of a decision of the Council for Electronic Media.

(2) The subject, the range and the term of the licence for telecommunication activity under para 1 may not differ from the subject, term and range of the licence for radio or television activity.

Section II

Issuance of individual licences

Art. 53. Individual licences shall be issued to sole entrepreneurs, corporate bodies and representations and other organisations having a statute of diplomatic missions. The individual licences for individual networks using a limited resource shall be issued to individuals.

Art. 54. Individual licences shall be issued without a competition or a tender when a limited resource is not used, observing the principles of transparency and equality.

Art. 55. (1) Individual licences shall be issued upon holding a competition or a tender when a limited resource is used.

(2) Individual licences shall be issued without a competition or a tender when the resource is limited in the following cases:

1. the number of applicants is less or equal to the operators who may be licensed for the respective free limited resource;

2. to public operators who need a radio frequency spectrum used for providing a transfer medium in their networks;

3. for telecommunication activity carried out by an individual operator – to the first one having declared his request in writing according to the principles under art. 28, para 1, item 1, letter "b" and the ordinances under art. 58;

4. for own needs of the state bodies related to their functions;

5. for the needs of representations of state and international organisations having a status of diplomatic missions;

6. upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media on the grounds of a competition held by the order of the Law of the radio and television;

7. for telecommunication activity – carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks under art. 49, para 2, item 3, 5 and 7 and providing telecommunication services under art. 49, para 2, item 6.

Art. 56. (1) Individual licence shall be issued without a competition or a tender by the Commission on the grounds of a written application in a form, accompanied by all required documents.

(2) The documents shall be in Bulgarian language in two equal copies.

(3) The filed application and the attached documents shall be considered within 30 days from their receipt.

(4) For missing and/or irregular documents the applicant shall be notified to remove the incompletes or irregularity within 7 days from receipt of the notification. If the incompletes or irregularity are not removed within the set term the application shall not be considered.

(5) The Commission shall announce its decision on the application within 6 weeks from its receipt and shall notify the applicant about it. When an international coordination is required for the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands necessary for the activity the term under para 3 shall be extended by the period of time necessary for the international coordination, and the applicants shall be notified about that.

Art. 57. (1) The Commission shall refuse by a decision the issuance of an individual licence when:

1. there is no free limited resource;

2. the activity would threaten the national security and the defence of the country or it contradicts international obligations of the country;

3. the person applying for the licence:

a) has been declared bankrupt or he is under proceedings for declaring bankruptcy;

b) is in liquidation;

c) has been divested of the right to practice trading;

d) has monetary liabilities to the state established by an enforced act of a competent body or a liability to insurance funds or to the Commission;

e) whose licence has been withdrawn for the same telecommunication service within the period set by the Commission according to art. 84, para 3;

f) has been punished for carrying out telecommunication activity without a licence under the conditions of art. 233, para 7;

4. the circumstances under art. 59 are present.

(2) The circumstances under para 1, item 3, letter "a", "b" and "d" shall be certified by a document issued by the respective competent body, and those under letter "c" – by a declaration.

(3) The provisions of para 1, item 3, letter "c" shall also regard managers or members of managing bodies of the applicant.

Art. 58. The conditions and the order of issuing individual licences without a competition or a tender for definite telecommunication activities shall be determined by ordinances of the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Art. 59. (1) Individual licence for telecommunication activity with national coverage shall not be issued to a public operator or to a related person in the meaning of the Commercial Law, holding other licence for the same kind of telecommunication activity.

(2) Individual licence for telecommunication activity shall not be issued to a public operator or to a related person in the meaning of the Commercial Law, holding a licence for national coverage for the same kind of telecommunication activity.

Art. 60. (1) The individual licence shall be valid for a period of 20 years.

(2) The term may be extended at a request of the person licensed by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications when:

1. the licensed person meets the requirements of the acting legislation, including requirements related to the national security and defence of the country;

2. the circumstances under art. 57, para 1, item 3 are not present with the licensed person.

(3) The Commission shall extend the term of the issued individual licences for telecommunication activity for carrying out telecommunications through available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground radio broadcasting upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media for extension of the term of the respective individual licence for carrying out radio and television activity, and where the preconditions under para 2 are present. In this case both licences shall be extended for an equal term.

Section III

Issuance of individual licences upon holding a competition or a tender

Art. 61. (1) A procedure for issuance of an individual licence through a competition or a tender shall be opened at the initiative of the Commission or at a request of an interested person.

(2) Upon a filed request by an interested person the Commission shall study the technical capacities for issuance of an individual licence and, within 30 days, shall notify him about the result.

(3) In the cases of para 1, and upon established availability of technical capacity under para 2, the Commission shall publish an announcement in at least one national daily newspaper and in its Internet site, declaring its intention to issue an individual licence for telecommunication activity, the technical parameters of the free limited resource and the term in which the interested persons may file their requests. The term may not be shorter than 30 days.

(4) Should the number of the persons, having filed a request under para 3, by lesser or equal to the number of the persons who may be licensed according to the free limited resource, the Commission shall inform the persons under para 3 within 7 days and shall issue individual licences on the grounds of art. 55, para 2, item 1, under the conditions and by the order of issuing individual licences without a competition or a tender. When their number is larger the Commission shall announce a competition or a tender.

Art. 62. (1) Within three months from expiration of the term under art. 61, para 3 the Commission shall announce, by a decision, a competition or a tender for issuance of an individual licence for telecommunication activity using a limited resource.

(2) The decision under para 1 shall contain:

1. subject and type of the competition or tender;

2. specific requirements for the persons who may participate, regarding technical or financial requirements, or conditions of observing the competition;

3. place, term and order of buying the competition or tender papers;

4. term and place of filing applications for participation;

5. size and way of payment of the deposit for participation;

6. initial tender price and step of bidding in announced tender;

7. date, place and hour of holding the competition or tender;

8. other concrete requirements related to the procedure of the competition or tender.

(3) The decision under para 1 shall be promulgated in the State Gazette.

Art. 63. (1) Competition shall be held where there is a necessity of a complex assessment for issuance of an individual licence. The competition may be attended and in absentia.

(2) Tender shall be held in the cases where, in view of the nature of the activity, the size of the offered tender price is of substantial importance. The tender may be held by advertised or negotiated bidding.

Art. 64. (1) The competition or tender papers shall contain:

1. requirements for implementation of the activity – subject of the competition or tender, as the rates of development and/or servicing, the quality of the services, the type of the used technology, obligations related to the national security and the defence of the country;

2. criteria for assessment, their relative weight and mechanism of assessment;

3. rules for holding the competition or the tender;

4. rules for work of the expert commission.

(2) The competition and tender papers under para 1 shall be worked out and approved by the Commission.

Art. 65. (1) The Commission shall appoint an expert commission for holding the competition or the tender.

(2) Where the activity, subject to the licence, may affect the interests of the national security and the defence of the country, participants in the expert commission shall also be representatives of the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Transport and Communications and the Ministry of Finance.

(3) A person, having a substantial commercial, financial or other business interest, may not participate as a member of the expert commission.

(4) Every member of the expert commission shall be obliged to declare in writing before the Commission the lack of a substantial commercial, financial or other business interest, which he and/or economically related with him or with members of his family, will have in choosing a candidate or they will not be employed in the body of management of the applicant having won the competition or tender within one year from the issuance of the licence.

(5) The declaration under para 4 shall state the names and the addresses of the economically related with him or with members of his family, as well as the substantial commercial, financial or other business interests which have occurred. The declarations shall be stored in a special public register of the Commission.

(6) Substantial commercial, financial or other business interest shall always be present when the members of the expert commission or members of their families, as well as persons economically connected with them receive licence under this law.

(7) The Commission shall appoint by a decision the members of the expert commission, the order of holding the sittings, the way of taking decisions, the issuance of written records, the remuneration for participation in the expert commission.

Art. 66. (1) The persons wishing to participate in the competition or a tender announced by the Commission shall file a written application for participation enclosing:

1. all court decisions related to the file of the applicant and a court certificate for current status;

2. proof of financial ability to carry out the activity, such as: annual accountancy balance and an account of the revenue and expenses, annual tax declarations, bank recommendations, documents for acquiring long-term assets;

3. a technical project and a business plan in compliance with the requirements of art. 64, para 1, item 1;

4. a document for paid deposit or bank guarantee for its size;

5. documents certifying a lack of the circumstances under art. 57, para 1, item 3;

6. declaration for protecting the confidentiality of the information contained in the competition or tender documentation;

7. a document for paid competition or tender documentation;

8. other documents related to the subject of the competition or tender.

(2) All documents shall be filed in Bulgarian language in two equal copies.

(3) In holding a tender with negotiated bidding equal envelopes shall contain the offers of the applicants for a tender price. The envelopes shall be opened in compliance with the rules for holding the tender, included in the tender documentation.

(4) In case of missing and/or irregular documents under para 1, with exception of those under item 3, the applicant shall be notified to remove the lack or irregularity, giving him a 7-day period from receipt of the notification. Should he fail to do so the applicant shall not be admitted to participate.

(5) An applicant who does not meet the requirements of art. 57, para 1, item 3 shall be removed from the competition or tender.

Art. 67. Within one month from the expiration of the term of acceptance of the documents the expert commission shall hold the competition or tender.

Art. 68. (1) In a competition the offers shall be classified on the basis of a complex assessment for meeting the competition requirements.

(2) In a tender the classification of the applicants shall be made considering the size of the offered tender price.

Art. 69. (1) The expert commission, within 7 days from conclusion of its work, shall present to the chairman of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications a report for the completed work and for the results from the classification, as well as the whole documentation related to the held competition or tender.

(2) Within 14 days from receipt of the documents under para 1 the commission shall take a decision:

1. for issuance of a licence to the applicant having won the competition or tender;

2. for termination of the competition or tender, not determining a winner when, as a result of the classification an applicant is not determined as meeting the requirements of the competition or tender.

(3) Within 3 days from taking the decision under para 2 the commission shall send it to the State Gazette for promulgation within 5 days from its receipt.

Art. 70. (1) The commission shall have the right to retain the deposits of the applicants who have filed complaints against the decision under art. 69, para 2 until the settlement of the dispute by the court.

(2) The deposits of the failed applicants shall be released within three working days from the expiration of the deadline for filing complaints against the decision under art. 69, para 2. Released within the same period shall be the deposits of all applicants on termination of the procedure.

(3) The deposits of the winner and of the applicant classified second shall be released within three working days from the enactment of the decision under art. 69, para 2, item 1.

Art. 71. (1) Within 14 days from the enactment of the decision under art. 69, para 2, item 1 the Commission shall issue an individual licence to the winner of the competition or tender.

(2) The individual licence shall bind the winner with the offers made in the competition or tender.

Art. 72. (1) If the winner refuses issuance of an individual licence and/or does not pay the final tender price offered by him within the term and in the way presented in the tender or competition documents it shall be offered to the applicant classified second.

(2) On refusal by the applicant classified second the procedure shall be terminated without issuance of an individual licence.

(3) The deposits of the persons under para 1 and 2 shall not be returned.

Section IV

Contents of the individual licence

Art. 73. (1) The individual licences of public operators shall obligatorily contain the following terms:

1. subject, term of the licence and territorial range;

2. technical requirements to be met by the networks and the equipment thereof;

3. an obligation for providing services to all users under conditions of equality;

4. requirements for quality of the services;

5. stages of construction, development or expansion of the network, term of starting the activity;

6. (amend. – SG 19/05) obligation for guaranteeing reliability in carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks in crises;

7. obligation for providing telecommunication services in introducing a regime of "martial law" or "war time";

8. (amend. – SG 19/05)additional obligations related to the national security and the defence of the country and in crises;

9. requirements for guaranteeing the confidentiality of the communications and protection of the personal data;

10. requirements for tracking telecommunications related to the national security and social order;

11. conditions of amendment, supplement, stopping and termination of the licence;

12. terms of withdrawal of the licence;

13. requirements related to the change of the control over the management of the licensed person;

14. way of determining licence and other fees and ways of payment;

15. obligation for submitting information for the purposes of regulation and requirements for admitting control over the fulfilment of the licence;

16. protection of the environment, the life and health of people.

(2) The individual licences under para 1 may also contain the following requirements related to:

1. submitted individually determined limited resource;

2. effective using and without radio interference of the radio frequency spectrum;

3. access and interconnection of the networks;

4. submitting of universal telecommunication service;

5. annual payment of an instalment for a fund for guaranteeing the providing of a universal telecommunication service;

6. issuance of telephone directories;

7. providing a free of charge access to emergency calls;

8. term of coordination with the commission of general terms of relations with end users;

9. depositing to the Minister of Transport and Communications of a sample of cryptographic key;

10. assistance regarding the introduction in the country of European and international telecommunications standards.

(3) The individual licences of the operators having a substantial impact on the market, carrying out telecommunications through fixed telephone networks and providing fixed voice telephone services and through providing the service "rented lines" shall contain the obligations stipulated by this law related to:

1. interconnection;

2. providing the service "rented lines";

3. providing specific access;

4. providing unbundled access to a subscriber line;

5. joint using of premises and telecommunication facilities, channels, towers, etc.

(4) The individual licences of individual operators shall obligatorily contain the requirements of para 1, item 1, 2, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16 and may also contain the requirements of para 2, item 1 and 2.

(5) The requirements of para 1, item 6, 7, 8 and 10 shall be coordinated with the competent bodies in charge of the national security and the defence of the country.

Art. 74. The individual licences for one and the same type of telecommunication activity shall contain equal in nature requirements for the operators, unless this law stipulates otherwise.

Section V

Amendment, supplement, stopping, transfer, termination or withdrawal of an individual licence

Art. 75. (1) Amendments and supplements of the licences may be introduced by a motivated decision of the Commission due to:

1. insurmountable force;

2. reasons related to the national security and the defence of the country;

3. changes of the internal legislation and decisions of international organisations in force for the Republic of Bulgaria;

4. reasons related to the public interest, ensuing from the effective using of a limited resource, the protection of the interests of the users, the providing of a universal telecommunication service and the encouraging of the competition on the telecommunications market.

(2) The amendments and supplements under para 1 shall be introduced upon a written notification of the licensed person, who may express an opinion within 7 days from receipt of the notification, when the amendments and supplements are related to para 1, item 4.

Art. 76. (1) The licensed operator may extend a motivated request to the Commission for amendment and supplement of the licence. The Commission shall study the substantiation of the request, shall assess the necessity of amendment and supplement of the licence and shall announce a decision within one month from receipt of the request.

(2) An amendment or supplement of the licence without a competition or a tender shall submit an additional limited resource to a public operator when the operator:

1. needs such a resource for expansion, modernisation and development of the public telecommunication network, and

2. he has used effectively the already submitted limited resource, and

3. he has a public telecommunication network allowing expansion, modernisation and development.

Art. 77. (1) The fulfilment of some or all activities under the licence may be suspended or terminated by a decision of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications:

1. on a motivated request of the Minister of Transport and Communications on introduction in the country of "martial law" or "war time" regime, or other extraordinary situation, where the needs so require;

2. on a motivated request of the competent bodies on occurrence of a danger for the national security or the defence of the country as a result of the fulfilment of one or more of the activities under the licence;

3. on death of the licensed individual; in this case the successors may, within three months, declare their request before the Commission for fulfilment of the activity, and continue to carry out the activity until the decision of the Commission is announced;

4. on liquidation or termination of the licensed corporate body, or termination of the activity of the licensed sole entrepreneur.

(2) The decisions under para 1, item 1 and 2 shall be motivated and shall be subject to an immediate fulfilment.

Art. 78. (1) The fulfilment of some or of all activities under the licence may be terminated by a motivated request of the licensed person when the fulfilment of the licensed activities becomes impossible. The Commission shall study the grounds of the request and shall announce a decision within one month from receipt of the request.

(2) The fulfilment of some or of all activities under the licence may be suspended at a motivated request of the licensed person for a period not longer than 18 months. The Commission shall study the request and shall announce a motivated decision refusing suspension where:

1. the request was made by an operator having a substantial impact on the market for activities regarding which he has been determined as such;

2. individually determined limited resource has been determined for the activity of the licensed person;

3. the activity is a result of an obligation for providing a universal telecommunication service.

Art. 79. (1) The term of a licence for telecommunication activity shall be terminated by a decision of the Commission when the licensed person or a person related to him in the meaning of the Commercial Law, upon holding a competition or a tender, has won, respectively they have won, a licence for the same kind of telecommunication activity with national coverage.

(2) The decision under para 1 shall set a period of termination of the activity under the licence.

Art. 80. On termination or suspension of the licence due to an occurrence of a danger for the national security and defence of the country according to art. 77, para 1, item 2, with exception of introduction of a regime "martial law" or "war time" the licensed person shall be entitled to an indemnification up to the size of the suffered proprietary damages related to the suspension or termination.

Art. 81. (1) The term of an individual licence for available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground broadcasting shall be terminated by a decision of the Commission upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media for termination of the respective licence for radio and television activity.

(2) When a decision of the Commission terminates the telecommunications licence for ground radio broadcasting on the grounds stipulated by art. 77, para 1, item 1, 2 and 3 and art. 78, para 1 the individual licence for radio and television activity shall be terminated by the Council for Electronic Media upon an enacted decision of the Commission.

Art. 82. (1) The individual licences shall be personal.

(2) Individual licences issued without a competition or a tender to telecommunications operators may be transferred to third persons upon a permit of the Commission.

(3) Individual licences issued after a competition or a tender may not be transferred during the first two years from their issuance, unless the licensed person has declared in advance his intention to establish a corporate body for fulfilment of the licence – entirely his ownership. Upon expiration of the two-year period the licences may be transferred to third persons upon a permit of the Commission.

(4) The Commission shall not permit transfer of individual licences in the cases of para 2 and 3 when the third persons:

1. do not meet the requirements of art. 57, para 1, item 3 and 4;

2. do not meet the requirements of the acting legislation, including the requirements related to the national security and the defence of the country.

(5) Individual licences for telecommunications activity through available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground radio broadcasting shall be transferred upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media to the person to whom the respective licence for radio and television activity has been transferred.

Art. 83. (1) Transfer of shares or stocks of the capital or admitting new partners in trade companies – licensed public operators may be carried out upon a prior notification to the Commission when the transfer of shares or stocks or the admission of new partners do not change the control over the management of the company.

(2) Transfer of shares or stocks of the capital or admission of new partners in trade companies – licensed public operators, which changes the control over the management of the company may be carried out upon a permit of the Commission.

(3) The licensed public operators – sole entrepreneurs may transfer their enterprises upon a permit of the Commission.

(4) The Commission may refuse a permit under para 2 or 3 when the following circumstances exist for the third persons:

1. they do not meet the requirements of art. 57, para 1, item 3, and for telecommunications he sole entrepreneurs – also the requirements of art. 57, para 1, item 4;

2. they do not meet the requirements of the acting legislation, including the requirements related to the national security and the defence of the country;

3. the request for permit has been made within the two-year period under art. 82, para 3.

(5) When the individual licence regards a telecommunication activity for carrying out telecommunications through using available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground broadcasting the Commission shall permit the transfer under para 2 and 3 upon obtaining a positive decision of the Council for Electronic Media.

(6) When stocks under para 2 have been acquired without the prior permit in public offering on the stock exchange or on other regulated market the acquirer may not exercise his right of voting on these stocks until the obtaining of a written permit by the Commission.

Art. 84. (1) The Commission, upon sending a written notice of a definite period may, by a motivated decision, withdraw the licence for:

1. a substantial or systematic violation of this law or of the terms of the licence;

2. a financial or technical inability of the licensed person to carry out his activity;

3. actions of the licensed person threatening the national security or the defence of the country.

(2) The Commission shall withdraw by a decision the licences upon requesting a written statement from the licensed person and, if within the term of the written notice under para 1, the licensed person has not rectified the offence.

(3) The decision for withdrawal shall determine a period during which the person may not apply for issuance of a new licence for the same activity. This period may not be shorter than one year and longer than three years.

(4) Individual licences for telecommunication activity through available and/or new telecommunication networks for ground radio broadcasting shall be withdrawn by the Commission upon a decision of the Council for Electronic Media for withdrawal of the respective licence for radio and television activity.

(5) When a decision of the Commission withdraws a telecommunications licence for ground radio broadcasting on the grounds under para 1 the individual licence for radio and television activity shall be withdrawn by the Council for Electronic Media upon the enactment of the decision of the Commission.

Section VI

Registration under a class licence

Art. 85. The class licence shall determine the conditions of carrying out telecommunications activity and the requirements regarding the persons wishing to carry it out.

Art. 86. (1) Before issuing a class licence the Commission shall publish the draft for discussion in one national daily newspaper and in its Internet site, and shall determine a period not shorter than 30 days, when written statements on the draft may be presented. The Commission shall study the statements and shall accept them or shall motivate in writing its decision for not accepting them.

(2) The class licence shall enter into force on the day of its promulgation in the State Gazette unless a date is not indicated in the licence.

Art. 87. (1) The Commission may amend the class licence if it is to the public interest, ensuing from the effective using of the radio frequency spectrum, the protection of the users and the encouragement of the competition.

(2) The Commission shall amend the class licence by the order of art. 86.

Art. 88. (1) Every person wishing to carry out telecommunications activity under a class licence shall file an application in a form for registration by the Commission. Attached to the application shall be a current status certificate for the court registration, a copy of a certificate for BULSTAT registration, a tax registration and a document for paid administrative fee for the service – consideration of an application.

(2) The persons under para 1 shall also present documents in compliance with the conditions and the requirements of the class licence.

(3) The Commission shall register the persons meeting the conditions and the requirements of the class licence within 30 days from receiving the application under para 1 and upon presentation of a document for paid registration fee.

(4) The Commission shall issue a certificate for registration to every person registered under a class licence.

(5) The Commission shall keep a public register for the persons registered under a class licence.

Art. 89. The rights and obligations related to the fulfilment of the telecommunications activity under a class licence shall occur within 30 days from filing the application under art. 88, para 1 in the case that the Commission has not announced a decision.

Art. 90. In the cases when the person does not meet the requirements and conditions stipulated by the class licence the Commission shall, by a motivated decision, refuse the registration and shall notify the person within 7 days.

Art. 91. The class licence shall contain the conditions under art. 73, depending on the kind of the telecommunications activity.

Art. 92. (1) Every person, registered under a class licence, shall be obliged to observe the conditions and the requirements stipulated by the class licence.

(2) The Commission, by a motivated decision, may write off the registration of every person carrying out activity under a class licence who violates its conditions and requirements if, after a 30-day warning, the person has not stopped the violation and has not removed the consequences.

Chapter six

UNIVERSAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE

Section I

Range

Art. 93. (1) A universal telecommunications service is a service of definite quality, submitted to every end user regardless of his geographic position, at an affordable price.

(2) The universal telecommunications service includes:

1. initial connection to a public fixed telephone network at an end point of it and an access to fixed voice telephone services (subscription), providing a possibility of carrying out urban, interurban and international calls;

2. access to a fixed voice telephone service through public telephone sets;

3. a telephone directory of the numbers of the subscribers of the fixed networks and providing telephone reference services for the numbers of the subscribers of the fixed and mobile networks;

4. unbundled access to emergency calls;

5. providing access to fixed voice telephone services under special conditions and/or providing terminals, where appropriate, for the disabled or underprivileged persons.

(3) The conditions and the order of providing the services under para 2 and the quality they provide shall be determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Section II

Determining operators obliged to provide universal telecommunications service

Art. 94. (1) The Commission shall assign to one or more operators the providing of all or some of the services under art. 93, para 2 for the purpose of providing the universal telecommunications service for the whole country.

(2) The obligation to provide a universal telecommunications service shall be assigned and determined by the individual licences of public operators carrying out telecommunications through fixed telephone networks.

Art. 95. (1) The Commission shall assign an obligation for providing a universal telecommunications service to public operators determined as operators having a substantial impact on the market, carrying out telecommunications through a fixed telecommunication network and providing fixed voice telephone services.

(2) The Commission shall hold a competition for assigning a universal telecommunications service to public operators who do not have a substantial impact on the market at their request. In holding the competition the conditions and the order determined for holding a competition for issuance of individual licence shall be observed.

(3) Winner of the competition under para 2 shall be the operator proving financial and technical possibilities of providing a universal telecommunications service in the most effective way and at the lowest price, including a minimal compensation of the expenses.

Section III

Providing a universal telecommunications service

Art. 96. (1) The operators obliged to provide a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 1 shall satisfy every substantiated application for connection to the public fixed telephone network at an end point and for access to fixed voice telephone services.

(2) The connection under art. 93, para 2, item 1 shall provide for the end users a fixed voice telephone service, facsimile transmissions and/or data transfer in the voice frequency band with a speed of no less than 2400 bits per second.

Art. 97. (1) Information for the telephone numbers of subscribers of public networks shall be submitted in compliance with the requirements for protection of the personal data stipulated by this law.

(2) The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 3 shall work out and publish at least once in three years, in the form of a publication, in a definite circulation, a telephone directory, as well as maintain an updated telephone directory in an electronic form. The directories shall contain the telephone numbers and other personal data for the subscribers.

(3) The directories under para 2 shall be generally accessible.

(4) The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 3 shall provide for the end users an access to a telephone information service for all numbers of the subscribers of networks entered in the telephone directory.

(5) The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 3 shall provide, free of charge, telephone directories to the disabled or to underprivileged persons who are subscribers of public fixed telephone networks. Depending on their technical and financial possibilities the operators shall prepare and submit to the disabled appropriate alternative telephone directories.

(6) Depending on their technical and financial possibilities the public operators providing a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 1 shall provide for subscribers with damaged eye-sight, upon request, detailed accounts in a form accessible for them.

Art. 98. (1) The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service under art. 93, para 2, item 2 shall provide constantly and proportionally to the number of the population of the serviced territory public telephone sets for access to a fixed voice telephone service.

(2) The operators under para 1 shall provide an access to the services for emergency calls through public telephone sets without using coins, counters, cards or other payment instruments.

(3) The operators under para 1 shall create the necessary conditions for providing to the disabled end users an appropriate access to a fixed voice telephone service through public telephone sets.

Art. 99. (1) The Commission shall work out a methodology for the conditions and the order of determining the affordability of the price of the universal telecommunications service and shall publish an announcement in a national daily newspaper and in its Internet site for the worked out project, indicating the place where the interested persons may obtain it and a period, not shorter than 14 days, when written statements may be presented.

(2) The Council of Ministers shall adopt by a decree the methodology under para 1.

Art. 100. The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service shall determine its price as affordable on the basis of the methodology under art. 99, para 1. The price of the universal telecommunications service shall be public.

Art. 101. The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service, in the presence of technical capacities, shall provide for the subscribers a possibility of observing and restricting, in due time, the using of some services unwanted by them, in order to control independently the expenses for the services.

Art. 102. (1) The public operators shall provide a universal telecommunications service according to the technical and technological development of a public fixed telephone network, regardless of the used technology, and with a quality in compliance with the requirements of art. 93, para 3 of the ordinance.

(2) The public operators providing a universal telecommunications service shall inform the Commission during the first quarter of each calendar year about the fulfilment of the obligation for the preceding year for providing a universal telecommunications service – coverage, quality, prices, expenses and revenue related to its provision, servicing of the requests, number of refusals to provide and the reasons for these refusals.

Art. 103. The public operators may refuse by motivation the providing of a universal telecommunications service for end users for reasons related to the following substantial requirements:

1. guaranteeing the security of the operation of the network in the presence of insurmountable force;

2. preservation of the entirety of the network;

3. providing interaction of the services;

4. protection of the personal data;

5. effective using of the radio frequency spectrum.

Section IV

Compensation of net losses from providing universal telecommunications service

Art. 104. (1) The public operators obliged to provide universal telecommunications service may request a compensation for proved net losses when the providing of the universal telecommunications service is an unfair burden for them.

(2) The presence of unfair burden shall be determined on the basis of the net losses and immaterial advantages caused by providing the universal telecommunications service on condition that:

1. the share of the operator obliged to provide universal telecommunications service is under 80 percent of the market of the fixed voice telephone service, and;

2. the number of his subscribers using price packages for economic using exceeds 17 percent of the total number of his subscribers.

Art. 105. (1) The Commission shall make up and adopt by a decision rules for calculation of the net losses of the public operators from providing universal telecommunications service.

(2) The public operators obliged to provide universal telecommunications service and request compensation shall work out a system of determining the size of the net losses according to the rules under para 1, which shall be approved by the Commission.

(3) The net losses from providing the universal telecommunications service shall be audited by an independent auditor appointed by the Commission for its account, and shall be published.

Art. 106. (1) The resources for compensation of the net losses for universal telecommunications service shall be raised in a Fund for guaranteeing the providing of telecommunications service, called hereinafter "the Fund".

(2) The Fund is a corporate body with a seat in Sofia.

(3) The Audit Office shall exercise control over the activity of the Fund.

(4) The Fund shall be exempt from state and local fees only for the operations related to compensation of the net losses for universal telecommunications service. The resources of the Fund shall be stored in the Bulgarian National Bank.

(5) The Fund shall be transformed, terminated and liquidated by a law.

Art. 107. (1) The Fund shall be managed by a managing board consisting of five members, including a chairman and a deputy chairman who shall be appointed as follows:

1. the chairman – by a decision of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications;

2. the deputy chairman – by a decision of the Commission for Protection of the Competition;

3. one member – by the Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank;

4. one member – by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy;

5. one member – by the Minister of Finance.

(2) The managing board of the Fund shall account for its activity by a report to the Minister of Transport and Communications, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Labour and Social Policy, the Governor of BNB and the Commission for Protection of the Competition.

Art. 108. (1) The decisions of the managing board shall be taken by a common majority. The decisions shall be accessible to the public.

(2) The managing board shall work out and adopt regulations for the activity of the Fund.

(3) The administrative servicing of the Fund shall be provided by the administration of the Commission.

Art. 109. (1) The resources of the Fund shall be spent only for compensation of net losses from providing a universal telecommunications service by the order of this section.

(2) The providing of services for emergency calls shall not be compensated.

Art. 110. (1) The operators providing a voice telephone service shall make instalments in the Fund under the conditions and by the order of this section.

(2) The size of the instalments under para 1 for telecommunications he respective year may not exceed 0.8 percent of the gross revenue, without VAT, of each public operator, of the provided voice telephone service, after the deduction of the expenses for outgoing traffic in interconnection of networks and the expenses for specific access.

(3) The operators under para 1 shall pay the instalments within one year from the enactment of the decision under art. 112, para 2. Failure to meet the deadline for payment of the instalments shall be considered a substantial violation of the licence terms.

(4) The instalments of the operators shall be considered inherent expenses of the activity.

Art. 111. (1) Applications for compensation of net losses from providing universal telecommunications service for the previous calendar year, accompanied by the necessary proof, shall be filed by the public operators with the managing board of the Fund by June 30 of the current year.

(2) The managing board shall send, within three days, the applications accompanied by the necessary proof, for obtaining a statement by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications.

(3) The Commission, upon holding a public discussion under art. 36 shall, within 45 days from receipt of the applications under para 2, give opinion regarding:

1. the presence of an unfair burden, including the importance of the immaterial advantages, for the respective operator incurred by the providing of a universal telecommunications service;

2. the size of the compensation requested by the respective applicant.

(4) Within the term under para 3 the Commission may request the applicants to present, within 7 days, additional information and/or proof.

Art. 112. (1) Within 7 days from receipt of the statement under art. 111, para 3 the managing board shall announce a decision regarding the total size of the compensation due to all applicants for the preceding year, as well as regarding the concrete sum of payment for each of them.

(2) Upon taking a decision under para 1 the managing board shall also determine by a decision the size of the instalment in the Fund by each operator under art. 110.

(3) Within 13 months from the enactment of the decision under para 2 the Fund shall pay the due compensations to the applicants. Deducted by the sum of the compensations shall be the financial result of the operators providing universal telecommunications service, for the taxation purposes.

If the total size of the due compensation for all applicants exceeds the size of the Fund designated for compensation of net losses for the preceding year the compensations shall be paid proportionally to the ratio between the total size of the due compensation and the total size of the resources of the Fund for the respective year. The unpaid part of the compensation shall be due during the next year.

Chapter seven

INTERCONNECTION, ACCESS AND RENTED LINES

Section I

Interconnection

Art. 113. (1) The public operators, providing through their networks a possibility of transfer, shall have a right and an obligation to provide interconnection between their networks.

(2) The operators shall carry out interconnection between their networks on the grounds of a written contract.

Art. 114. (1) The operators under art. 113, para 1 are:

1. operators providing telecommunications services through the fixed and/or mobile public telecommunications networks, managing the facilities of access to one or more points of the network, using numbers of the National Numbering Plan;

2. operators providing the service "Rented lines" to the place of location of the terminal telecommunication equipment of the consumer, with exception of operators re-renting "rented lines";

3. operators carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks, whose licences stipulate interconnection.

(2) The operators under para 1, item 3 shall be determined by a decision of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications in compliance with the principles of transparency, objectivity and equality. The decision shall be published in the Internet site of the Commission.

(3) The conditions and the order of carrying out interconnection of the operators under art. 113, para 1 shall be determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Art. 115. (1) The operators under art. 113, para 1 shall provide interconnection observing the following substantial requirements:

1. guaranteeing the security of the operation of the network under insurmountable force;

2. preservation of the entirety of the network;

3. providing interaction of the services;

4. protection of the personal data.

(2) The operators under art. 113, para 1 may refuse interconnection for reasons related to non-compliance with the substantial requirements of para 1.

Art. 116. (1) The Commission may take a decision for a temporary restriction of the obligations for interaction with an operator under art. 113, para 1 where there are no available the necessary resources for providing the required interconnection and the operator has proposed other technical and commercial conditions in comparison with the required interconnection.

(2) The decision under para 1 shall be published in the Internet site of the Commission.

Art. 117. The public operators providing a voice telephone service through their fixed or mobile networks shall be obliged to provide these services in a way by which they can be used by the end users of other network connected to theirs.

Art. 118. The operators, having a substantial impact on the market, in interconnection shall be obliged to:

1. observe the principle of equality, including regarding persons related to them in the meaning of the Commercial Law;

2. provide access to information and specifications necessary for the interconnection, on request of the operators;

3. observe the commercial secret and use the information, obtained from the operators only according to their designation.

Art. 119. (1) The operators of fixed telephone networks providing fixed voice telephone services, and the operators providing the service "rented lines", having a substantial impact on the market, shall work out a model proposal for conclusion of an interconnection contract.

(2) The model proposal under para 1 shall obligatorily contain:

1. a description of the services of the interconnection of each of telecommunications he networks, terms and conditions of their providing;

2. requirements for quality of the interconnection;

3. location of the points of the interconnection, conditions and terms of their opening or closing;

4. conditions of providing additional services related to the interconnection;

5. conditions of assembly, using and maintaining of the facilities of the interconnection and training;

6. technical requirements and interfaces for the interconnection;

7. acceptance tests;

8. requirements for management of the traffic of interconnection;

9. requirements for numeration, addressing and identification of the calling line;

10. prices and ways of payment;

11. minimal terms of notification for amendment, supplement and termination of the contract;

12. requirements for meeting the substantial requirements;

13. liability for failure of fulfilment;

14. conditions for joint using of premises, telecommunications facilities, channels, towers, etc.;

15. parts of the contract containing commercial secret.

(3) The model proposal shall be approved by the Commission within 45 days from its receipt. The Commission shall carry out a procedure of public discussion by the order of art. 36 within a period not shorter than 30 days.

(4) The operators under para 1 shall provide updated and public accessibility to the model proposal and shall submit it free of charge on request.

(5) The operators may amend the model proposal by the order of para 3.

(6) The operators under para 1 shall conclude contracts for interconnection on the basis of the model proposal. The contracts may not amend the model proposal.

Art. 120. The Commission may, by a decision, oblige the operators under art. 119 to amend their model proposals regarding the conditions for providing effective competition, technical conditions, conditions related to the tariffs, the providing and using of the service, the observance of certain standards, protection of the environment and maintaining the quality of the services, as well as to the interest of the users.

Art. 121. (1) The operators under art. 119 shall determine the prices for interconnection, observing the principles of transparency and equality.

(2) The prices under para 1 shall be expense substantiated.

(3) The prices for interconnection shall contain the following components:

1. initial price regarding the physical interconnection;

2. subscription price regarding the current maintenance and servicing;

3. price for the traffic regarding the commutation and transfer of the outgoing traffic;

4. other prices for service and additional operations, such as access to the reference services, operator access, gathering fee data.

(4) The operators under art. 119 shall keep separate book-entry for the expenses related to the activities of the interconnection, as well as for the expenses related to other telecommunication activities.

(5) The operators under art. 119 shall implement a system of determining the expenses in elements, so that the prices for interconnection on the basis of the expenses can be established for each technically possible point of the interconnection.

(6) The Commission shall approve the system of determining the expenses under para 5. Before approving the system the Commission may require an opinion of an independent auditor.

(7) The prices for the interconnection under para 3, item 3 shall have an independent structure, whereas the person requesting interconnection shall be obliged to pay only for the service he requests.

Art. 122. The Commission may require from the operators under art. 119 to present a substantiation of the prices for interconnection and, where necessary, issue by a decision obligatory instructions for their bringing in compliance with their cost orientation.

Art. 123. (1) The operators under art. 113, para 1 and art. 119 shall send their contracts for interconnection to the Commission within three weeks before their enactment.

(2) The Commission may, by a decision, give obligatory instructions to the operators to amend the conditions of the concluded contracts for interconnection only in case of a necessity of providing interaction between the services to the interest of the users and/or providing effective competition.

Art. 124. (1) If an operator does not fulfil his obligation under this section within two months the affected persons may file a request to the Commission.

(2) The Commission shall study the request, giving a chance to the operator to present an opinion on it and, where necessary, require additional proof regarding telecommunications he request.

(3) Within two months from filing the request the Commission may issue obligatory instructions to the operator related to the filed request.

Section II

Specific access to a fixed telephone network and unbundled access to a subscriber line

Art. 125. (1) Specific access to a public fixed telephone network is an access to all points of the network determined by the Commission for the purpose of providing telecommunication services.

(2) Unbundled access to a subscriber line is providing by an operator of a fixed public telephone network, having a substantial impact on the market, of individual or joint using by other operators of the twisted copper couple connecting a terminal point of the network in the premises of the subscriber with the main repartition of the settlement exchange or an equivalent facility of the fixed public telephone network.

Art. 126. (1) The public operators of fixed telephone networks providing fixed voice telephone services, having a considerable impact on the market, shall provide a specific access to the network upon a grounded and technically necessary request.

(2) The operators under para 1 shall provide a specific access by observing the principle of equality, including regarding the persons related to them.

(3) The operators under para 1 may refuse a specific access for reasons related to non-observance of the substantial requirements under art. 115, para 1. The refusal shall be motivated.

(4) The Commission for Regulation of the Communication may take a decision for temporary restriction of the obligation for providing a specific access where there are no necessary resources for providing the requested specific access and the operator has offered other technical and commercial conditions similar to the requested specific access.

Art. 127. (1) Operators of public fixed telephone networks providing fixed voice telephone services, having a substantial impact on the market, shall provide a unbundled access to the subscriber line upon a grounded and technically necessary request.

(2) The operators under para 1 shall provide a unbundled access by observing the principles of transparency and equality.

(3) The operators under para 1 may refuse a unbundled access for reasons related to non-observance of the substantial requirements under art. 115, para 1, item 2. The refusal shall be motivated.

Art. 128. In providing a unbundled access to the subscriber line the operators, obliged to provide it, shall provide and joint using of premises and telecommunication facilities.

Art. 129. (1) The operators under art. 126, para 1 shall determine the prices of specific access to the network by observing the principles of transparency and cost orientation.

(2) The operators under para 1 shall keep separate book-entry related to the activities of providing a specific access to the network and for the expenses related to other telecommunication activities.

Art. 130. (1) The operators under art. 127 shall determine the prices of unbundled access to the subscriber line by observing the principles of transparency and cost orientation.

(2) The prices of unbundled access to the subscriber line shall be:

1. initial price covering the expenses for providing a unbundled access to the subscriber line (equipment, resources, compatibility test);

2. prices covering the expenses for the current maintenance of the equipment and resources;

3. monthly prices for using the subscriber line;

4. other prices for service and additional services, such as access to reference services, operator connection, gathering payment data.

(3) The operators under art. 127 shall keep separate book-entry for the expenses related to the activities of providing unbundled access to the subscriber line and for the expenses related to other telecommunication activities.

(4) The operators under art. 127 shall implement a system for determining the expenses in elements, so that the prices for a unbundled access to the subscriber line on the basis of the expenses may be established for each technically feasible access point.

(5) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall approve the system of determining the expenses under para 4. Before the approval of the system the Commission may request the opinion of an independent auditor. If the system for determining the expenses under para 4 does not meet the requirements for cost orientation the Commission shall return it to the operator with obligatory instructions.

(6) The prices under para 2 shall have an independent structure, and the person requesting an access to the subscriber line shall be obliged to pay only for the service he requests.

Art. 131. The Commission may require from the operators under art. 127 to present a substantiation of the prices for access to the subscriber line and, where necessary, give obligatory instructions for their bringing in compliance with their cost orientation.

Art. 132. (1) The operators under art. 126 shall provide a specific access to the fixed telephone network on the grounds of a written contract to be sent to the Commission within three weeks before its entering into force.

(2) The Commission may, by a decision, give obligatory instructions for amendment of the contract for the purpose of providing interaction between the services to the interest of the users or for providing effective competition.

Art. 133. (1) The operators under art. 127 shall work out a model proposal for conclusion of a contract for unbundled access to a subscriber line.

(2) The model proposal under para 1 shall obligatorily contain:

1. means of providing the services (individually used or jointly used access to a subscriber line);

2. conditions of providing, using and termination of the access;

3. conditions of obtaining information from the provider of unbundled access regarding the location of the physical access, a free subscriber capacity and presence of subscriber lines;

4. technical conditions and specifications of the lines for unbundled access to the subscriber line;

5. conditions of joint using of premises and telecommunications facilities;

6. conditions of access to information regarding samples of documents for applying for the service "providing unbundled access";

7. acceptance tests;

8. protection from interference;

9. prices and way of payment;

10. changes in the way of access;

11. minimal term of the contract;

12. maximal terms of notification for amendment, supplement and termination of the contract;

13. parts of the contract containing a commercial secret.

(3) The model proposal shall be approved by the Commission within 45 days from its receipt. The Commission shall hold a procedure for public discussion by the order of art. 36 within a period not shorter than 30 days.

(4) The operators under para 1 shall provide updated model proposal and public access and shall submit it free of charge on request.

Art. 134. The Commission may, by a decision, oblige the operators under art. 127 to amend their model proposals regarding the conditions aiming at providing effective competition, technical conditions, conditions related to the tariffs, the providing and the using of the service, observance of certain standards, protection of the environment and maintaining the quality of the services, as well as to the interest of the users.

Art. 135. The operators under art. 127 shall send their contracts for unbundled access to the Commission within three weeks before their entry into force. The Commission, to the interest of the users, may oblige the operators by a decision to amend the terms of these contracts.

Art. 136. (1) If an operator does not fulfil an obligation under this section within two months the affected persons may file a request to the Commission.

(2) The Commission shall study the request giving a possibility to the operator to present a statement on it and, where necessary, require further proof for the request.

(3) The Commission, within two months from receipt of the request, may give obligatory instruction, by a decision, to the operator related to the request.

Section III

Rented line

Art. 137. The public operators shall provide the service "rented lines" by observing the principles of transparency, objectivity and equality.

Art. 138. (1) Every person may request the service "rented lines".

(2) The service "rented lines" shall be provided by licensed public operators.

Art. 139. (1) Public operators having a substantial impact on the respective market shall provide the service "rented lines" by observing the following principles:

1. publicly known and objective conditions of access to the service and its using;

2. equality of the users except in the cases of providing the service for the needs of the defence and security of the country;

3. guaranteeing the confidentiality of the telecommunications and protection of the confidentiality of the personal data of the users;

4. objective and publicly announced prices comprised with the expenses related to the providing of the service.

(2) The prices under para 1, item 4 shall contain the following elements:

1. initial price covering the expenses related to the physical connection (equipment, resources, compatibility tests);

2. subscription price related to the current maintenance and servicing;

3. other prices for service and additional services, such as access to the reference services, operator connection, gathering payment data.

Art. 140. (1) The public operators shall provide the service "rented lines" under conditions and by an order determined by an ordinance worked out by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications and adopted by the Council of Ministers.

(2) The ordinance under para 1 shall determine a minimal package of types of lines for rent, with technical requirements harmonised with the European standards, which the public operators having a substantial impact on the market shall be obliged to provide to their users.

(3) The public operators having a substantial impact on the market shall work out and submit for approval by the Commission a model proposal for conclusion of a contract for providing the service "rented lines".

(4) The model proposal under para 3 shall obligatorily contain:

1. a description of the service, the conditions and terms for its providing;

2. requirements for quality;

3. point of connection;

4. conditions for fitting, using and maintenance of the telecommunications equipment;

5. technical requirements and interfaces;

6. acceptance tests;

7. prices and way of payment;

8. minimal terms of notification for amendment, supplement and termination of the contract;

9. liability for non-fulfilment;

10. conditions for joint using of premises, telecommunications facilities, channels, towers, etc.;

11. parts of the contract containing commercial secret;

12. conditions for connection of telecommunications facilities and terminal telecommunications devices to rented lines.

(5) The model proposal shall be approved by the Commission within 45 days from its receipt. The Commission shall hold a procedure of public discussion by the order of art. 36 within a period not shorter than 30 days.

(6) The operators under para 3 shall provide updated model proposal and public access to it and shall submit it free of charge on request.

(7) The operators under para 3 may amend the model proposal by the order of para 5.

(8) The operators under para 3 shall conclude contracts for providing the service "rented lines" on the basis of the model proposal. The contracts may not amend the model proposal.

(9) The prices of the service "rented lines" of the minimal package, provided by the operators under para 3 shall be expense substantiated.

Art. 141. (1) The providing of the service "rented lines" by the public operators having a substantial impact on the market shall be carried out by observance of the following substantial requirements:

1. guaranteeing the security of the work of the network in conditions of insurmountable force;

2. preservation of the entirety of the network;

3. providing interaction between the services;

4. protection of the personal data.

(2) The operators having a substantial impact on the market may refuse to provide the service "rented lines" within the minimal package only in case of non-observance of the substantial requirements of para 1. The refusal shall be motivated in writing.

(3) The operators having a substantial impact on the market may introduce temporary restrictions of the providing of the service "rented lines" where:

1. terminal telecommunications devices connected to a rented line have no assessed compliance;

2. activities related to the maintenance and development of the network are carried out.

(4) On introducing the restrictions under para 3 the operators shall notify the users in an appropriate way and within the shortest possible period.

(5) In the cases of para 3, item 1 the operator may terminate the providing of the service "rented lines" until the disconnecting of the respective terminal telecommunications device.

Art. 142. (1) If an operator does not fulfil any obligation under this section within two months the affected persons may file a request to the Commission.

(2) The Commission shall study the request, giving a possibility to the operator to submit a statement on it and, where necessary, shall require additional proof for the request.

(3) Within two months from receipt of the request the Commission may give, by a decision, obligatory instructions to the operator regarding the filed request.

Art. 143. For the needs of the national security and the defence of the country the operators having a substantial impact on the market shall provide with priority the service "rented lines". For lack of a technical possibility the operators shall notify immediately the competent bodies of the defence and security.

Art. 144. (1) The operators having a substantial impact on the market may provide the service "rented lines" outside the range of the minimal package by negotiating with the users, under conditions of publicity of the technical characteristics.

(2) The contracts for providing the service "rented lines" under para 1, including the contracted prices, shall be submitted for information upon request of the Commission.

Art. 145. (1) Periodically, at least once a year, the Commission shall carry out and publish a study of the market of the service "rented lines" and the needs of the market of types of lines outside the minimal package.

(2) On the basis of the study under para 1 the Commission, upon a consultation with the operators, shall publish lists of types of lines for rent, subject to inclusion in the minimal package, as well as the term of this inclusion.

Chapter eight

PROTECTION OF THE INTERESTS OF THE END USERS

Art. 146. (1) The public operators shall provide telecommunications services to end users by observing the principles of transparency, proportionality and equality, in compliance with the type of the used technology, the categories of subscribers and the volume of the traffic, without creating priorities for individual end users or a group of them regarding one and the same service.

(2) The operators under para 1 shall work out general conditions for the relations with their end users when the conclusion of only individual contracts with them is practically inapplicable.

(3) The public operators carrying out telecommunications through a fixed telephone network and a mobile network shall obligatorily work out general conditions.

(4) In the cases when the service is provided only on the grounds of a concluded individual contract shall obligatorily apply the principle of equality according to para 1, and the contract shall obligatorily contain the requirements of art. 148.

Art. 147. The general conditions shall be an integral part of the individual contract between the operator and the end user.

Art. 148. The general conditions shall obligatorily contain:

1. identification data for the operator (name and recent court registration, seat and address of management, number/date of the issued individual licence or registration under a class licence);

2. description of the provided services, quality of the services and servicing, terms of initial connection, of activation of the services and removal of damages;

3. prices, ways and terms of their payment;

4. basic rights and obligations of the operator and of the end user;

5. conditions of termination and continuation of the individual contract;

6. obligation of the operator for:

a) prior notification for disconnection and poor quality of the provided service in carrying out prophylactics, repairs or development of the network, as well as for the periods of disconnection or poor quality of the service;

b) prior notification of the end user on request for access to his premises;

c) public announcement of an address and/or telephone number for contact in cases of damages and for submitting information;

d) providing a free of charge access to the services for emergency calls until the termination of the contract by the order of the general conditions of the contract with the end users;

e) storing, for a definite period, of the data necessary for the payments;

7. procedures of considering and deciding on complaints, applications and proposals of the end users;

8. liabilities, indemnifications and forfeits for non-fulfilment of the general conditions;

9. conditions and order of stopping the providing of the service for not paying the due sums or contractual offences on the part of the end users in connection with the using of the service.

Art. 149. (1) The public operators shall submit their general conditions for coordination with the Commission.

(2) In the event that the general conditions do not meet the requirements of the individual or class licence, within 14 days from their submission the Commission shall notify the operators under para 1, giving instructions and a period for removal of the shortcomings.

(3) Upon removal of the shortcomings the operators under para 1 shall submit again the general conditions to the Commission.

(4) The Commission shall coordinate the general conditions within 14 days from their initial or repeated presentation.

(5) The operators shall publish their general conditions within 7 days from their coordination in a way determined by the Commission.

Art. 150. (1) Amendments of the general conditions may be introduced at an initiative of the operator, of the end users or of the Commission.

(2) Amendment of the general conditions at an initiative of the operator shall be introduced by the order of art. 149.

(3) Amendment of the general conditions at an initiative of the end users shall be introduced upon filing a request for such amendment to the Commission. The Commission shall study the request, giving a possibility to the operator to present a statement on it.

(4) The Commission shall announce a decision on the request under para 3 within one month from its receipt. If the Commission approves the requested amendments the decision shall give obligatory instructions and a term, not longer than 14 days, for their introduction by the operator.

(5) Amendment of the general conditions may be introduced at an initiative of the Commission for the purpose of ensuring the interests of the end users. In this case the Commission shall give, by a decision, obligatory instructions to the operator regarding the respective amendments.

Art. 151. (1) The Commission may work out model general conditions regarding the relations between the operators and the end users to be published in its Internet site.

(2) In the cases of para 1 the operators shall work out their general conditions in compliance with the model ones and shall present them to the Commission.

Art. 152. The Commission shall send the general conditions, coordinated according to art. 149 and 150, for information to the Commission for Trade and Protection of the Consumers.

Chapter nine

NUMBERS, ADDRESSES AND NAMES IN THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Art. 153. The National Numbering Plan represents the distribution of the numbers used in the public networks for identification, routing and charging fees.

Art. 154. (1) The National Numbering Plan shall be worked out by the Commission in compliance with the regulatory policy under art. 27, item 10, by observing the principles of objectivity, proportionality, equality, transparency and timeliness, and taking into account the national and public interests.

(2) The plan under para 1 shall be worked out by observing the acts of international organisations and/or their competent bodies and for the purpose of providing effective using of the numeration space.

(3) The National Numbering Plan shall be promulgated in the State Gazette.

Art. 155. (1) The rules for distribution and the procedures of submitting for using, reserving and withdrawal of numbers, addresses and names shall be determined by the Minister of Transport and Communications.

(2) The Commission shall store information for the used addresses and names.

Art. 156. The public operators, using numbers of the National Numbering Plan, shall provide a possibility for their subscribers to keep their numbers on changing their address and/or change of the operator by an operator providing the same kind of service.

Art. 157. The Commission may, in issuing licences, not impose the obligation under art. 156, or limit it within the boundaries of one settlement only where this requirements is not applicable for technical reasons.

Art. 158. Operators having a substantial impact on the market, providing fixed voice telephone services, shall provide a possibility for each subscriber to choose an operator of the transfer medium for interurban and international calls:

1. for each call;

2. on subscription basis.

Chapter

RADIO FREQUENCY SPECTRUM AND POSITIONS OF THE GEO-STATIONARY ORBIT

Art. 159. The effective using, without radio interference, of the radio frequency spectrum shall be provided in compliance with international agreements party to which is the Republic of Bulgaria, and shall be realised by a state policy of planning and distribution of the radio frequency spectrum, the National Plan for Distribution of the Radio Frequency Spectrum and the principles of management and distribution of the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs.

Art. 160. The National Plan for Distribution of the Radio Frequency Spectrum of radio frequencies and radio frequency bands for civil needs, for the needs of the national security and the defence of the country, as well as for joint using between them, shall distribute the radio frequency spectrum to radio frequencies and radio frequency bands to radio services.

Art. 161. The positions of the geo-stationary orbit for the Republic of Bulgaria shall be determined by international agreements.

Art. 162. The radio frequency spectrum shall be distributed to radio frequencies and radio frequency bands from 9 kHz to 1000 GHz.

Art. 163. The management of the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geo-stationary orbit shall be carried out for the purpose of the effective using, and without radio interference, of the radio frequency spectrum by observing the interests of the national security and the defence of the country, and by observing the principles of predictability, proportionality and objectivity.

Art. 164. (1) The using of the positions of the geo-stationary orbit and of the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands distributed for civil needs shall be carried out upon their submission for using by the Commission by the order of this law.

(2) The using of the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands distributed for civil needs in the radio frequency bands for joint using shall be carried out upon their submission for using by the Commission, upon a national coordination and concurrence by the order of art. 28, para 1, item 3.

(3) The radio frequencies and the radio frequency bands, distributed only for the needs of the national security and the defence in the National Plan for Distribution of the Radio Frequency Spectrum shall be used without an explicit permit, except in the cases under art. 11.

Art. 165. The Commission shall exercise control of the effective using without radio interference of:

1. the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands for civil needs;

2. the radio frequencies and radio frequency bands distributed for civil needs in the radio frequency bands for joint using.

Art. 166. For providing the safety of the air and sea navigation, and for the purposes of protection of the national security and the defence of the country, the submitting of radio frequencies and radio frequency bands shall be carried out upon a national coordination and concurrence and international coordination.

Chapter eleven

CONSTRUCTION AND USING OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE

Section I

Construction of telecommunications infrastructure

Art. 167. (1) The construction of a telecommunications infrastructure shall be carried out by the order of this law, of the Law of spatial planning and by observance of the requirements of the normative acts for the construction and the rules for control and acceptance of the construction and mounting works.

(2) The rules for construction of telecommunications networks and facilities, including the requirements for safety, shall be settled by ordinances of the Minister of Transport and Communications and the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works.

(3) During the construction of telecommunications networks and facilities the operators shall take measures for protection of the environment, for not admitting damages or their restriction and not admitting difficulties of using the real estates according to their purpose during the works.

(4) Upon conclusion of the activities under para 3 the operators shall, within one month, remove for their account, the caused damages.

(5) The telecommunications infrastructure constructed by a telecommunications operator shall be his property.

Art. 168. (1) When the construction or expansion of underground and ground public telecommunications networks is carried out on a land – private state property or on a private municipal property, the competent state or municipal bodies, at a proposal of the Minister of Transport and Communications shall vest to the public telecommunications operators an onerous right of construction on the estates without a tender or a competition.

(2) When the construction or expansion of the sites under para 1 is impossible the networks and facilities shall be constructed on land properties owned by individuals and corporate bodies upon negotiation.

Art. 169. (1) The operators shall create and maintain specialised maps, registers and, where possible, information systems for the telecommunications infrastructure constructed by them.

(2) Copies of the specialised maps and data from the registers in information systems under para 1 shall be submitted to the Cadastre Agency.

(3) The contents of the specialised maps and registers, as well as the conditions and the order of their creation and maintenance shall be determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Transport and Communications and the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works.

Art. 170. The designs of the buildings shall provide for the construction of channels for cables providing access to the telecommunications networks, which shall be constructed simultaneously with the buildings.

Section II

Coordination of the construction works

Art. 171. (1) Every person planning to carry out construction works in regulated and not regulated land property shall be obliged to request in advance a written information from the respective cadastre offices for the location of the telecommunications networks and facilities in the area of the works. The requested information shall be submitted within 14 days.

(2) The person under para 1 shall be obliged to inform the operators of the telecommunications networks and facilities about the construction works within 14 days from obtaining the information under para 1, and coordinate the way of their protection with the operators.

(3) The procedure under para 2 shall not apply in emergency works for removal of the consequences from accidents and natural calamities. In these cases the persons carrying out the works shall be obliged to inform immediately the respective operators.

(4) Where it is necessary to move telecommunications networks and facilities in connection with forthcoming works under para 1 the interested persons shall negotiate the conditions for the moving before the commencement of the construction works. The moving shall be carried out by the Law of the spatial planning upon a reached agreement.

(5) When, after the concluded construction under para 4, it becomes necessary for a part of the telecommunications network to be protected by additional facilities, the expenses related to this protection shall be taken over by the person at whose request the construction has been made.

Art. 172. In issuing visas for designing construction on land properties where telecommunications networks and facilities have already been constructed the respective bodies shall take into consideration their location and technical parameters.

Art. 173. (1) The coordination of the preliminary investment designs and the permits for construction shall be submitted:

1. by the mayor of the respective municipality – for public telecommunications networks and facilities with a range and importance for one municipality;

2. by the regional governor, on the grounds of a statement of the regional expert council – for public telecommunications networks and facilities with a range and importance for more than one municipality;

3. by the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works on the grounds of a statement of the national expert council – for public telecommunications networks and facilities with national range and importance.

(2) Te activities under para 1 shall be carried out under conditions and by an order determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works and the Minister of Transport and Communications.

(3) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall cooperate with the telecommunications operators in carrying out the activities under para 1.

Section III

Right of way

Art. 174. (1) In case of a necessity of construction or expansion, or maintenance of existing public networks and facilities in regulated and not regulated land properties – public or private state property or public or private municipal property, the public operator carrying out telecommunications through a telecommunications network shall have a right of way. The concrete parameters of its fulfilment shall be determined by an order of the regional governor, respectively of the mayor of the municipality.

(2) Where the right of way, by the order of para 1, is impossible the operators of public networks and facilities shall have the right of way on land properties of individuals and corporate bodies.

(3) The operators and the owners of real estates under para 2 shall negotiate in writing terms and conditions of realisation of the right of way for the purpose of not encumbering or worsening the customary using of the land property.

(4) The operator under para 1 shall indemnify the owner for all damages caused to his property in connection with the works perform by him, including restoration for his account of the state of the property in compliance with its purpose or customary using.

(5) For not reaching an agreement on the right of way and other technical solution is apparently economically inexpedient, the right of way shall be vested by an order of the mayor of the respective municipality by the order of the Law of the spatial planning.

Art. 175. (1) The persons authorised by the telecommunications operators shall have the right to carry out activities related to the using and maintenance of the telecommunications networks and facilities in the estates where they are located.

(2) The persons under para 1 shall be obliged to inform the owners or the users of the real estates under para 1 at least 24 hours before the fulfilment of the activities related to the using and maintaining of the telecommunications networks and facilities in these real estates.

(3) The operators shall restore, for their account, the state of the real estate in compliance with its purpose or usual using in connection with the activities under para 1, and when this is impossible, they shall indemnify the owner for all damages caused to his real estate. Disputes regarding the size of the indemnification shall not stop the fulfilment of the activities related to the using and maintaining the telecommunications networks and facilities.

Art. 176. (1) The public operators shall have the right to use roads, railways, bridges, tunnels, streets, sidewalks, easement strips and other technical infrastructure – public property, for construction, expansion and using of telecommunications networks in compliance with the plans of the detailed spatial plans, in the presence of technical and physical possibilities, and upon obtaining a permit by the bodies or the persons administering them, providing a technical safety and undertaking measures for not admitting damages.

(2) The order by which the public operators shall carry out their activities under para 1 shall be determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Transport and Communications and the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works.

Section IV

Joint using of premises and facilities

Art. 177. (1) A public operator may request a joint using of premises and facilities used by another public telecommunications operator. The conditions and the order of joint using shall be negotiated between the operators.

(2) Public operators of fixed telephone networks providing fixed voice telephone services, and public operators providing the service "rented lines" having a substantial impact on the respective market may not refuse a request for joint using in the presence of technical and physical possibility.

(3) The refusal of joint using under para 2 shall be motivated.

Art. 178. (1) In negotiating the joint using the operators under art. 177, para 2 shall observe the following principles:

1. equality and transparency;

2. publicity of the conditions and terms of conclusion of the contract.

(2) In determining the prices for joint using the operators under para 1 shall observe the principle of cost orientation, taking into account the following elements:

1. initial price covering the expenses related to the physical fulfilment of the joint using;

2. prices covering the expenses related to the current maintenance of the facilities and premises.

Art. 179. (1) The operators under art. 177, para 2 shall work out general conditions for conclusion of a contract for joint using.

(2) The general conditions shall obligatorily contain:

1. a description of the various facilities and premises for joint using, conditions and terms of their providing;

2. conditions of mounting, using and maintenance of the facilities and premises;

3. technical requirements;

4. prices and ways of payment;

5. minimal terms of notification for amendment, supplement and termination of the contract.

(3) The general conditions under para 2 or the proposals for their amendment and supplement shall be approved by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications within one month from their receipt in the Commission. The operators shall provide updated general conditions and public accessibility and shall submit them free of charge upon request.

(4) The operators under art. 177, para 2 shall conclude contracts for joint using on the grounds of the general conditions. The contracts may not amend the general conditions under para 2.

Art. 180. The Commission for Regulation of the Communications may oblige the operators under art. 177, para 2 to amend their general conditions to the interest of the users regarding technical requirements, compliance with definite standards, protection of the environment, the life and health of people.

Art. 181. (1) In case if a refusal under art. 177, para 3, as well as for not reaching an agreement within two months regarding the providing or the conditions of providing joint using the affected party may file a request to the Commission for Regulation of the Communications.

(2) The Commission shall study the request, giving a possibility to the operator under art. 177, para 2, to present a statement on it and, where necessary, require additional proof for the filed request.

(3) The Commission, within two months from filing the request, may give, by a decision, obligatory instructions to the operator under art. 177, para 2 regarding the filed request.

Chapter twelve

PROVIDING TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE EVENT OF CRISES AND IN THE EVENT OF INTRODUCTION OF A STATE OF MARTIAL LAW, OR A STATE OF WAR, OR OTHER STATE OF EMERGENCY (Title amend. – SG 19/05)

Art. 182. (amend. – SG 19/05) The conditions and the order of using telecommunication networks in the event of crises and in the event of introduction of a state of martial law, or a state of war, or a state of emergency under Art. 60a of the Law of Defence and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria shall be defined by the Minister of Transport and Communications in co-ordination with the respective competent authorities.

Art. 183. (1) (amend. – SG 19/05) Telecommunication operators shall render assistance in providing telecommunications in the event of crises and in the event of introduction of a state of martial law or state of war, or state of emergency under Art. 60a of the Law of Defence and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria.

(2) The obligations, requirements and restrictions related to the national defence and the security shall be defined by the individual and class licenses issued.

Art. 184. In the event of declaring in the country a state of martial law, or a state of war, the Minister of Transport and Communications, at the proposal of a competent authority, may require that the Commission for Regulation of the Communications cancels the validity of the individual licenses issued, as well as ban the use of radio equipment and of the radio frequency spectrum for civil needs.

Art. 185. (1) (amend. – SG 19/05) The Bulgarian Telecommunication Company shall use, modernise and maintain telecommunication facilities with defence functions and installed war-time capacities, which are part of the national defence and security, in readiness to provide, in the event of crises and in the event of introduction of a state of martial law or state of war, or state of emergency under Art. 60a of the Law of Defence and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria.

(2) Telecommunication facilities under para 1, as well as the land on which they are built, may be subject to expropriation, liquidation, lease or imposition of liens only by a decision of the Council of Ministers.

(3) Telecommunication facilities under para 1 and the war-time capacities installed may be used also in time of peace for civil needs on terms and conditions, established by the Council of Ministers.

(4) The funds for building, maintaining, reconstructing and modernising the facilities and capacities under para 1 shall be provided from the state budget, by the Bulgarian Telecommunication Company and from other sources under conditions and by an order determined by the Council of Ministers.

Chapter thirteen

PROVIDING CONDITIONS FOR THE INTERCEPTION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS RELATED TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY AND THE PUBLIC ORDER

Art. 186. Public operators shall provide for possibility of interception of telecommunications in real time, possibility of uninterrupted monitoring, as well as real time access to data related to a specific call. In the event that these data can not be supplied in real time, they shall be placed at the disposal of a specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior, in the shortest possible term after the end of the conversation. Interception possibilities, uninterruptible monitoring and real time access to data related to a specific call shall be performed only under the Law of Special Intelligence Devices.

Art. 187. (1) Public operators shall, at their expense, provide one or several intercepting interfaces from which the intercepted telecommunications may be transferred to the devices of the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior.

(2) The specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior and the public telecommunication operators shall coordinate the requirements for the intercepting interfaces and other related matters under the terms and conditions defined by an Ordinance of the Minister of the Interior. The coordinated requirements shall be submitted to the Commission for Regulation of the Communications for the inclusion in the licence of the respective operator.

Art. 188. Public operators shall submit data related to the call and the content of this call in a manner, allowing the establishing of accurate correspondence between the call data and the content of the call.

Art. 189. In the event that public operators undertake coding, compression or encryption of the intercepted telecommunications, they shall submit them to the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior in their original form.

Art. 190. Public operators shall provide the possibility for transmission of the intercepted telecommunications to the devices of the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior, through fixed or switch connections.

Art. 191. Interception shall be realised in a way, which excludes the possibility for illegal interference, and ensures the protection of the information related to the interception. The intercepted telecommunications shall be received only by the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior.

Art. 192. (1) Prior to carrying out interception on a legal ground, the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior shall request from the public telecommunication operators to provide:

1. data for establishing the subscriber’s identity, number or other identification sign of the telecommunication service;

2. information for the service and the characteristics of the telecommunication system used by the object of interception and made available by the telecommunication operators;

3. information for the technical parameters of the transfer to the equipment of the specialised unit under Art. 122 of the Law of the Ministry of Interior.

(2) The data under para 1 shall be delivered to the unit of the Ministry of Interior under the Law of the Ministry of Interior.

 

Chapter fourteen

CONFIDENTIALITY OF MESSAGES AND PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA IN CARRYING OUT TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Section I

Confidentiality of Messages

Art. 193. Public operators shall be obligated to guarantee the confidentiality of communications by taking all necessary technical and organisational measures for that.

Art. 194. (1) Public operators shall be obligated not to reveal the information or data that has become known to them in the course of providing the telecommunication service.

(2) The obligations under para 1 shall also apply to the employees of the operator, having access to such information, or who could obtain access to it.

Art. 195. (1) The confidentiality of communications comprises the type of the service, the content of the communication and all data, concerning the provision of the service.

(2) In case of a danger of violation the communication confidentiality the public operator shall notify his subscribers for the availability of such danger and for the means of its elimination including the expected expenditures.

Art. 196. For the purpose of preserving the confidentiality the tracking, recording and keeping of messages, designated to other persons shall be prohibited except by the consent of the persons concerned or in cases stipulated by a law.

Section II

Protection of Personal Data and Data of End users of Telecommunication Services

Art. 197. (1) Public operators may collect, process and use personal data and data for end users where such data are designated for the provision of a public telecommunication service.

(2) The data under para 1 shall comprise the data directly related to the provision of telecommunication services, as follows:

1. data necessary for the provision of telecommunication services – traffic data:

a) the number of the calling end user and the number of the called end user, the card number in the event that electronic prepaid cards are used, the location of a mobile end user, when mobile terminal devices are used;

b) beginning and end of the call, specified by date and hour, with accuracy up to a second, if technically possible, and/or - in case of data transfer - volume of the transferred data, when this is necessary for determination of the pricing due;

c) the type of telecommunication service used by the end user;

d) the interconnection points of making the call and beginning and end of their use, specified by date and hour with accuracy up to a second, if technically possible;

e) other data necessary for making and sustaining the call;

f) data for billing purposes and price formation, such as type of connection or zones (time and geographical);

2. data, necessary for the payment for provided telecommunication services and for the formation of subscriber bills, as well as for proving their reliability, inclusive the data under item 1, as well as the following data:

a) data for the subscriber – name and address of the subscriber;

b) type of the equipment used or of the telecommunication service;

c) total number of price units, charged for the period of drawing the bill for a regular account;

d) volume of data transferred;

e) total amount due for the respective period of used services;

f) information related to the option for payment chosen by the subscriber and the made and due payments;

g) information regarding changes in the use of the service – restriction of use, restoration after the restriction.

Art. 198. (1). Public operators shall not request from an end user further data than those under Art. 197 para 2 for the provision of telecommunication services.

(2) Public operators shall not put the provision of telecommunication services under the condition of submission of data, which is not required, for any of the services provided or depending on the consent of a user or subscriber that his data is used for other purposes.

Art. 199. (1) A public operator who has gathered and processed traffic data for the purposes of a call, shall be obliged, after termination of the call or connection, to delete these data or make it anonymous, unless it is directly necessary for the realisation of a new call or in the cases stipulated by this law.

(2) A public operator shall store the data for the formation of subscriber accounts after termination of the call or connection until the termination of the period during which the data from the charging may be required, disputed or payment may be made.

(3) A public telecommunication operator may use the data under para 2 to study the extent to which the provided telecommunication services satisfy the needs of the end users, only upon their personal written consent. The data for the subscriber called shall be de-personified.

Art. 200. (1) Processing of traffic data and charging data shall be carried out by persons who are in charge of:

1. the administration of traffic data and data of charging,

2. customers inquiries,

3. the establishment of misuse and

4. marketing of telecommunication services.

(2) The persons under para 1 shall have access only to data necessary for their respective activity.

Art. 201. (1) At a subscriber’s request the traffic data gathered and processed by the public telecommunication operator shall be entirely deleted not later than the moment of sending the bills.

(2) When the data are deleted under the conditions of para 1, the public telecommunication operator shall not have the duty to submit this data as evidence in the case of contesting the bill.

Art. 202. Public operators may gather, process and use data for:

1. detecting, locating and eliminating defects and errors in the telecommunication networks;

2. detecting and terminating unauthorised use of public telecommunication networks and facilities, where there are grounds to consider that such actions are being performed and this has been claimed in writing by the affected party or a competent authority;

3. detecting and tracking of disturbing calls, upon a request on the part of the affected subscriber towards the operator to take action.

Art. 203. (1) Public operators shall, in due time, inform the Commission for Regulation of the Communications when gathering and processing data in the cases of Art. 202.

(2) When carrying out the activities of Art. 202 the public operators shall inform the persons subject to these activities in the shortest possible time, unless this will prevent the achievement of the purposes specified in Art. 202.

Art. 204. (1) Public operators of mobile or fixed telephone networks providing voice telephone services shall be obliged, in the presence of a technical possibility, to provide the functions of "calling line identification" and "called line identification".

(2) When technical capacity for the provision of the service under para 1 is not available, the Commission for Regulation of the Communications, jointly with the telecommunication operator and according to the investment policy of the latter shall establish an order and telecommunications a term for the introduction of these functions of the network.

(3) Operators under para 1 carrying out the "calling line identification" function of the network shall provide the end users, free of charge, with the opportunity to perform activation or deactivation of the function for each call or permanently for their respective line by generally accessible means from their terminal equipment.

(4) When providing services for the realisation of emergency calls, the public telecommunication operators under para 1 shall guarantee that the "calling line identification" service can not be deactivated neither for each separate call, nor for the respective line.

(5) Operators under para 1 shall provide to their end users free of charge the network function "stop of the reception of the calls re-directed to their terminal equipment" when technical capacity for this is available.

(6) Operators under para 1 shall perform or grant for performing calls or transmission of facsimile communications for direct advertising over their respective networks only upon the personal written consent of its subscribers.

(7) The conditions and the order of granting and using the functions of the networks under para 1 and para 5 shall be determined by an Ordinance issued by the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Art. 205. (1) Public operators, working out and publishing telephone directories in printed or electronic form, shall include free of charge in the directories the name, address and telephone number of the subscriber. The telephone directory may also include additional data insofar as the subscriber has so requested.

(2) Public operators, publishing telephone directories in electronic form, used also through Internet or another network, shall be obliged to provide access to the respective telephone number only provided that a minimum amount of data has been introduced fully and accurately. The access to data only through an entered telephone number shall be prohibited.

(3) The subscriber shall have the right to refuse the entering of a part or of all data into the telephone directory without obligation of payment for that.

(4) The subscriber shall have the right to request the entire or partial deletion, or change in subscriber’s data in the telephone directory. The data shall be deleted or modified when a new or an updated telephone directory is issued.

(5) The subscriber may request that additional information is included in the telephone directory concerning other people using jointly the line, provided that their written approval is given in advance.

(6) The conditions and the order of issuing telephone directories, including operation with the database, their transfer and using, shall be defined by an Ordinance, issued by the Minister of Transport and Communications.

Art. 206. (1) Public operators having the obligation to provide telephone information services, shall provide such services in compliance with the data included in a printed or electronic telephone directory.

(2) The operator under para 1 shall be obliged to provide information for the respective telephone number only provided that a minimum amount of data has been submitted fully and accurately. The access to data only through the information on telephone number shall be prohibited.

(3) The conditions and the order of providing information services shall be settled by the Ordinance under Art. 205, para 6.

Art. 207. For all the matters unregulated by this chapter the provisions of the Law of Protection of Personal Data shall respectively apply.

Chapter fifteen

RADIO EQUIPMENT AND TERMINAL TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT

Art. 208. (1) A person who lets on the market radio equipment that may not be put into service on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, or its putting into service is conditioned on the issuance of an individual license or on the registration under a class license, shall notify the National Radio Frequency Spectrum Council and the Commission, at least one month prior to letting it on the market.

(2) The notification under para 1 shall contain:

1. the name and address of the person placing the radio-equipment on the market;

2. the name of radio equipment and data for its the technical parameters;

3. the identification number of the person having assessed the conformity of the radio-equipment with the essential requirements by the order of the Law of Technical Requirements for Products;

4. date and signature.

(3) The person under para 1 shall put on a sign of a specific mark for identification of the radio equipment, as the order and the way of its placing shall be determined by an Ordinance of the Council of Ministers at a proposal of the Commission.

Art. 209. (1) Putting into service of the radio equipment may only be restricted for the following reasons:

a) effective and undisturbed use of the radio frequency spectrum allocated in accordance with the National Plan for Allocation of Radio Frequencies Spectrum;

b) protection of human life and health;

c) reasons related to the national security and defence of the country.

(2) The Commission, in coordination with the National Radio Frequency Spectrum Council shall prepare a list of radio equipment, whose putting into service is restricted, which shall be adopted by a decision of the Council of Ministers. The decision shall be promulgated in the State Gazette.

(3) The list under para 2 shall contain:

1. radio equipment which may not be put into service,

2. radio equipment whose putting into service is conditioned on the issuance of an individual licence or on the registration under a class licence for the respective telecommunication activity.

Art. 210. (1) Public telecommunications operators carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks may not refuse connection of the terminal telecommunication equipment to the respective interfaces for technical considerations, where the former have been assessed for conformity.

(2) When terminal telecommunication equipment, which have been assessed for conformity, cause serious damage to the network, generate harmful interference, harm the network or its functioning, or are not used in accordance with their intended use, the operators under para 1 shall have the right to refuse connection, to disconnect them or terminate the providing of services through them, after performing all the necessary technical examinations. In that cases the operators shall immediately notify the Commission and the State Agency for Metrology and Technical Supervision.

(3) In cases of emergency the operators may disconnect a terminal telecommunication equipment, if the protection of the network requires its immediate disconnection, and if an alternative solution for connection to the network can be immediately, and free of charge, proposed to the user.

(4) In the cases under para 3 the operators shall immediately notify the Commission.

Art. 211. (1) Public operators carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks, prior to offering their services, shall publish technical specifications of the interfaces for the connection of terminal telecommunication equipment to their networks, and shall periodically update them.

(2) The technical specifications under para 1 shall include all necessary data allowing the producers to carry out, by their choice, tests for the applicable technical requirements for the terminal telecommunications devices and restructure them in such a way as to be able to provide all services through the respective interface.

Art. 212. (1) Radio-equipment and terminal telecommunication equipment, incorporating equipment for encryption of telecommunication messages shall be imported, distributed and used subject to permission by the Minister of the Interior.

(2) The conditions and the order of issuing permits under para 1 shall be determined by an Ordinance of the Council of Ministers, at a proposal of the Minister of Interior.

(3) The provision of para 2 shall not apply to radio and television program broadcasting.

Chapter sixteen

PRICES AND FEES

Section I

Prices

Art. 213. (1) The public operators shall determine prices of the services provided by them according to the requirements of this law.

(2) The prices under para 1 shall be published by the operators in a way determined by the licences.

Art. 214. (1) The prices of the telecommunication services shall be determined by the public operators in compliance with the demand and offering, by providing equality of the users, taking into account the type of the used technology, the categories of end users and the volume of the traffic.

(2) The public operators may determine new packages of services ensuring the right of the users to services outside the price package as well.

(3) The public operators may offer discounts for used services under publicly announced conditions when they are used by everyone meeting preliminarily announced conditions for their provision.

(4) Prior to their publishing the prices of the telecommunication services shall be submitted to the Commission for information.

Section II

Regulated prices

Art. 215. (1) The Commission shall regulate the following prices determined by the operators having a substantial impact on the market of fixed telephone networks and fixed voice telephone services and providing the service "rented lines":

1. for a fixed voice telephone service;

2. for interconnection;

3. for providing the service "rented lines" from the range of the minimal package;

4. for a specific access;

5. for a unbundled access to the subscriber line;

6. for joint using of premises and facilities.

(2) The Commission shall submit an information for the prices of the services under para 1 to the Commission for Trade and Protection of the Consumers.

Art. 216. (1) The prices of the service under art. 215, para 1, item 1 shall be determined by the public operators on the grounds of rules adopted by a decision of the Commission for their determination and the expenses related to its submission.

(2) The prices of the services under art. 215, para 1, item 2 and 5 shall be determined by the public operators on the basis of the expenses related to their provision, calculated by a system of determining the expenses approved by the Commission.

(3) The Commission may impose restrictions regarding the prices under art. 215, para 1 for the purpose of stimulating the effectiveness of the operator, and according to his investment expenses for development of the network in a medium-term plan.

(4) The prices under art. 215, para 1 may not:

1. contain elements of the price formation based solely on the substantial impact of the operator on the market;

2. contain discounts violating the ability of competition on the part of other public operators for the respective service;

3. create conditions for individual users for the same or a similar service;

4. be under the level of the expenses related to their provision.

Art. 217. (1) The operators under art. 215, para 1, within 4 months from their defining as operators having a substantial impact on the respective market, shall present for approval by the Commission the system of determining the expenses under art. 216, para 2.

(2) The Commission shall approve the system within two months from its receipt. Before the approval upon consultations with the respective operators the Commission may require amendments for it which do not threaten the financial sturdiness of the operator.

(3) The Commission may impose restrictions regarding the prices under art. 215, para 1 for the purpose of stimulating the effectiveness of the operator and according to his investment expenses for development of the network in medium-term plan.

(4) The operators shall publish annually analysis of the degree of implementation of the principles of cost orientation and separate book-entry for the respective services offered by them.

Art. 218. (1) The operators shall present the prices of the services under art. 215, para 1 to the Commission one month before their publishing, along with the documents for price formation.

(2) In the event that the prices do not meet the requirements of art. 216 the Commission shall oblige the operators to rework them.

(3) The Commission may require once in 6 months proof of cost orientation of already coordinated prices.

(4) The Commission shall also regulate the prices of telecommunication services for which it is established that they are offered in abuse of a dominating status in the meaning of the Law of protection of the competition.

Art. 219. In the event that, within one month, the operators do not rework the prices according to art. 218, para 2, as well as in the cases of art. 218, para 4, the Commission, upon coordination with the Commission for protection of the competition, shall determine limits of the prices of the respective services for a period of up to 6 months.

Section III

Fees

Art. 220. (1) The licence and registration fees shall cover the administrative expenses of the Commission for activities related to the licensing, registration and control of the conditions stipulated by the licences.

(2) The fees for a limited resource shall provide preconditions for its effective using, the development of the competition and the provision of new services.

Art. 221. (1) All licensed operators by individual licences shall pay licence fees.

(2) The licence fees are:

1. initial – for the issuance of the licence;

2. annual – for providing the regulation activities – up to 1.2 percent of the annual gross revenue from the licensed activity, without value added tax, after deduction of the expenses, where applicable, for outgoing traffic, for interconnection of networks and for specific access;

3. a fee for amendment and supplement of the licence.

(3) The size of the initial licence fee shall be determined by taking into account the administrative expenses related to its preparation and issuance, including:

1. work and materials;

2. proportionally distributed development and consulting activity and analysis of the respective market, related to the issuance of the licence;

3. frequency planning and national and international coordination.

(4) On holding a tender for issuance of the licence the initial licence fee shall be of the size of the final tender price, containing also the fee in the meaning of para 3.

(5) The fee under para 2, item 2 shall be determined annually by the order of art. 42 and shall be paid in quarterly instalments by the 15th of the month following the quarter. The instalment for the fourth quarter shall be balancing and shall be paid within 15 days after the deadline determined by the Accountancy Law for preparing the annual financial report. The instalments made during the year shall be balanced on the basis of a copy, by the licensed operator, of an annual financial report certified by an independent financial auditor, along with its annexes.

Art. 222. (1) The individually licensed operators shall pay annual fees for using a limited resource of the radio frequency spectrum and/or of the positions of the geo-stationary orbit allocated for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements.

(2) On submitting an additional radio frequency spectrum to licensed public operators under art. 76, para 2 they shall pay an additional one-time fee.

(3) The individually licensed operators shall pay an annual fee for using a limited resource of the National Numbering Plan.

(4) The sizes of the fees under para 1 and 2 shall be determined on the grounds of one or more of the following criteria:

1. number of registered residents who may be serviced by the licensed activity;

2. territorial range stipulated by the licence;

3. capacity of the transmitter outlet;

4. occupied frequency band;

5. number of used radio stations;

6. number of used radio frequency channels;

7. type of the radio frequency channel (radio frequency band) – simplex/duplex;

8. kind of the licensed activity;

9. number of used radio networks;

10. mode of employee of the radio stations and networks;

11. term of using the radio frequency spectrum.

(5) The fees under para 1 and 3 shall be paid in 4 equal instalments by the end of the month preceding the quarter.

(6) At a request of the operator the fees under para 1 and 3 may be paid by the end of the first quarter of the current year. In this case the fee shall be paid by a discount amounting to 5 percent.

Art. 223. (1) All operators registered under a class licence shall pay a registration fee.

(2) The size of the registration fee shall be determined in dependence of the administrative expenses related to the registration and the preparation and issuance of the class licence.

Art. 224. (1) The size of the fees under this section, the terms and the ways of their payment shall be determined by a Tariff for the fees collected by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications, to be adopted by the Council of Ministers at a proposal of the Commission.

(2) The Tariff under para 1 shall also determine the size of the fees for administrative services provided by the Commission.

(3) The fees shall be determined in compliance with the following principles:

1. equality of the operators;

2. proportionality with respect of the administrative expenses;

3. encouragement of the competition and of the providing of new services;

4. provision of effective using of the limited resources;

5. satisfying the needs of the public of quality telecommunication services.

(4) The licensed operators shall pay equal licence fees for equal type and size of the licensed activity.

Art. 225. (1) The licence fees stipulated by the individual licences for telecommunication activity shall be allocated as follows:

1. the initial fee received under a tender procedure:

a) 25 percent – for providing the resources under art. 17;

b) 5 percent – for the budget of the Commission;

c) 70 percent – to the republican budget;

2. the initial and annual fee – for the budget of the Commission.

(2) The fees for using a limited resource shall be allocated as follows:

1. the fee for using radio frequency spectrum:

a) 35 percent – for providing the resources under art. 17;

b) 40 percent – for the budget of the Commission;

c) 25 percent – for the republican budget;

2. the additional one-time fee for submitting additional radio frequency spectrum:

a) 25 percent – for providing the resources under art. 17;

b) 5 percent – for the budget of the Commission;

c) 70 percent – for the republican budget;

3. the fee for using numbers of the National Numbering Plan – for the budget of the Commission;

4. the fees for using the positions of the geo-stationary orbit allocated for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements:

a) 25 percent – for providing the resources under art. 17;

b) 5 percent – for the budget of the Commission;

c) 70 percent – for the republican budget;

Art. 226. (1) All fees shall be installed in the budget of the Commission and, within three months after their receipt, shall be reallocated by the order of art. 225.

(2) No fees shall be due by the order of this section by:

1. state bodies carrying out telecommunications for their own needs, related to their functions;

2. diplomatic representations and other organisations having the status of diplomatic missions when they carry out telecommunications for their own needs on the grounds of reciprocity.

Chapter seventeen

CONTROL

Art. 227. (1) The control over the telecommunication activities shall be exercised by the Commission.

(2) The control over the commissioning of the radio facilities of the list under art. 209, para 2 shall be exercised by the Commission.

(3) In exercising the control under para 1 and 2 the Commission shall interact with the Ministry of Transport and Communications, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of defence and the Ministry of Finance. The conditions and the order of the interaction shall be settled by a joint instruction.

Art. 228. (1) For the purposes of the control over the telecommunication activities the chairman of the Commission shall authorise by an order employees of its administration.

(2) The employees under para 1 shall obligatorily be insured for accidents having occurred during or on occasion of fulfilment of their official duties by resources of the budget of the Commission.

Art. 229. (1) In carrying out their functions the employees of the Commission authorised according to art. 228, para 1 shall have the right to:

1. carry out inspections, establish violation and issue acts by the order of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions;

2. a frees to the sites subject to control, accommodating telecommunication facilities;

3. inspect the documents issued by the Commission, proving the legal capacity of the persons in the controlled sites;

4. require information and documents related to the control;

5. require original documents, data, information, references and other bearers of information from the inspected persons, as well as seize certified copies of documents related to the telecommunication activity and/or establishing administrative offences under this law;

6. inspect accountancy, trade or other books or documents and bearers of information, as well as other documents related to the telecommunication activity, subject to individual licensing and/or to establishing administrative offences under this law;

7. require from third persons information, abstracts and other documents necessary for carrying out cross examinations related to telecommunications he control under this law and/or the establishment of administrative offences under this law;

8. control the quality parameters of the telecommunication services by carrying out documentary and technical inspections;

9. search premises used by the inspected persons for the purpose of telecommunication activity, as well as premises containing proof of committed administrative offences.

(2) In the cases of inspection of premises under para 1, item 9, used as a living place, the inspections shall be carried out by the employees authorised under art. 228, para 1 jointly with the bodies of the Ministry of Interior, by observing the provisions of the Penal Procedure Code.

Art. 230. (1) On establishing offences by the order of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions the issuers of acts may seize and keep material evidence related to the establishment of the offence by the order of art. 41 of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions.

(2) The seized material evidence shall be subject to seizure in favour of the state by a penal provision or by a resolution by the order of art. 20 and 21 of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions for present corpus delicti according to the respective administrative penal provisions.

(3) The possessions seized in favour of the state shall be stored in premises specially provided for that purpose until the expiration of one year from the enactment of the resolution, the penal provision or court decision confirming it.

(4) Upon the expiration of the term under para 3 the seized possessions shall be subject to destruction by an order stipulated by an ordinance of the Council of Ministers, at a proposal of the Commission. The possessions or parts of them seized in favour of the state, which may be used without violating the laws and the acting standards of the country, may be submitted to educational establishments for educational purposes, to hospitals or other organisations, by a decision of the Commission.

Art. 231. (1) In fulfilment of their official duties the employees authorised according to art. 228, para 1 shall be obliged:

1. to legitimise themselves by an official card;

2. to keep the confidentiality of the circumstances and facts having become known to them during or on occasion of the fulfilment of their official duties.

(2) The order and the way of using and storing the circumstances and facts under para 1, item 2, as well as the organisation of the work in exercising the control over the telecommunication activities shall be determined by a decision of the Commission.

(3) The chairman of the Commission shall appoint the employees of the administration who will be in charge of the storing and using of the facts and circumstances under para 1, item 2.

(4) The employees under para 1, item 3 shall sign a declaration in a form related to their duties, explicitly stating their responsibility for failure to fulfil these duties.

Art. 232. (1) The chairman of the Commission may issue orders suspending, until the removal of the offences, the fulfilment of telecommunication activities, carried out in violation of the law, by-laws and licence terms.

(2) The orders under para 1 may impose a compulsory administrative measure for closing sites and/or facilities, having served for telecommunication activities carried out in violation of the law, by-laws and licence terms.

(3) The orders under para 1 shall be subject to appeal before the Supreme Administrative Court.

Chapter eighteen

ADMINISTRATIVE PENAL PROVISIONS

Art. 233. (1) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity subject to licensing upon a competition or a tender, or continues to carry it out after the suspending, termination or withdrawal of the licence, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 50 000 to 500 000 levs.

(2) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity subject to licensing without a competition or a tender, carrying out telecommunications through telecommunication networks and/or providing telecommunication services by using individually allocated limited resource, or continues to carry it out after the suspending, termination or withdrawal of the licence, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 20 000 to 250 000 levs.

(3) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity subject to licensing without a competition or a tender, without using a limited resource, or continues to carry it out after the suspending, termination or withdrawal of the licence, shall be punished by a fine of 10 000 to 200 000 levs.

(4) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity, carrying out telecommunications through individual telecommunication networks for own needs, by using individually allocated limited resource, or continues to carry it out after the suspending, termination or withdrawal of the licence, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 10 000 levs.

(5) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity as a public operator under the conditions of a class licence shall be punished by a fine of 5000 to 10 000 levs.

(6) Who, without a licence, carries out telecommunication activity for own needs under the conditions of a class licence shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 5000 levs.

(7) For offence under para 1 – 6 committed for a second time the administrative penal body, by a penal provision, may divest the offender from the right to practice telecommunication activity for which he has been punished for a period of up to one year.

Art. 234. (1) An operator having a substantial impact on the market, who violates or does not fulfil the requirements of the issued licence, regarding his specific obligations as an operator having a substantial impact on the market, shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 100 000 to 500 000 levs.

(2) A public operator who violates or does not fulfil the requirements of the issued individual licence shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 5000 to 50 000 levs.

(3) An individual operator who violates or does not fulfil the requirements of the issued individual licence shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 10 000 levs.

(4) A public operator carrying out telecommunication activity on the grounds of a registration under a class licence and violates its requirements shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 5000 to 15 000 levs.

(5) An individual operator carrying out telecommunication activity on the grounds of a registration under a class licence and violates its requirements shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 5000 levs.

Art. 235. (1) Who violates the rules regarding the preservation of the confidentiality of the communications sent by public telecommunication networks, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 10 000 levs.

(2) A public operator who fails to fulfil an obligation for providing conditions for interception of telecommunications, related to the national security and public order, shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 5000 to 100 000 levs.

(3) A public operator who does not fulfil an obligation related to the provision of the protection of the personal data in the sphere of the telecommunications shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 1000 to 20 000 levs.

Art. 236. Who interferes and/or changes the contents of communications of third persons in a public telecommunication network by using telecommunication facilities, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 200 to 2000 levs.

Art. 237. Who transfers, through a public telecommunication network, false calls or misleading signs and/or signals for help, calamity, accident, incident or alert, shall be punished by a fine of 2000 to 50 000 levs.

Art. 238. Who, for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for another a benefit, using telecommunication facilities, thus causing damage to a telecommunications operator or to a third person, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 3000 to 10 000 levs, whereas the damages shall be indemnified by the general actionable order.

Art. 239. Who commissions radio equipment in violation of the requirements of art. 209, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 3000 to 15 000 levs.

Art. 240. Who causes damages to public telecommunication networks and facilities, thus interrupting or obstructing the telecommunications, unless the act represents a crime, shall be punished by a fine of 100 to 5000 levs, whereas the damages shall be indemnified by the general actionable order.

Art. 241. (1) Who, at a request of the Commission, does not provide information related to the implementation of this law, or presents untrue, incomplete, incorrect or untimely information within the period which may be determined by the request, shall be punished by a fine of 100 to 500 levs.

(2) Who obstructs the exercising of the control of the Commission under art. 227 shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 5000 levs.

(3) Who does not fulfil an enacted decision of the Commission shall be punished by a fine of 1000 to 10 000 levs.

(4) A public operator who does not submit to the Commission documents and information necessary for defining an operator having a substantial impact on the market shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 2000 to 20 000 levs.

(5) An operator, having a substantial impact on the market, who does not fulfil an enacted decision of the Commission regarding his specific obligations as an operator having a substantial impact on the market, shall be punished by a proprietary sanction of 10 000 to 100 000 levs.

Art. 242. The persons under art. 228, para 1 who make public, submit, publish, use or circulate in any other way, data and circumstances representing official secret, shall be punished by a fine of 500 to 5000 levs and shall be divested of the right to occupy the respective position for a period of 6 months to one year.

Art. 243. A proprietary sanction of 50 000 to 500 000 levs shall be imposed for violation of art. 185.

Art. 244. A fine of 100 to 1000 levs shall be imposed for violation of this law and of the acts issued pursuant to it, where another punishment is not stipulated.

Art. 245. For the offences under art. 233, para 1 – 6, art. 234, para 3 and 5, art. 235, para 1, art. 236, 239, 240, art. 241, para 1 and 3 and art. 244 committed by corporate bodies or sole entrepreneurs proprietary sanctions of the sizes of the fines shall apply.

Art. 246. (1) On establishing the offences under art. 233 – 244 the employees authorised according to art. 228, para 1 shall issue acts by the order of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions.

(2) On the grounds of the acts under para 1 the chairman of the Commission, or a person explicitly authorised by him – a member of the commission, shall issue penal provisions or motivated resolutions for termination of the administrative penal proceedings.

(3) The establishment of the offences, the issuance, the appeal and the fulfilment of the penal provisions shall be carried out by the order of the Law of the administrative offences and sanctions.

(4) Penal provisions imposing a fine or a proprietary sanction up to 200 levs shall not be subject to appeal.

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

§ 1. For the purposes of this Law:

1. "Telecommunication network" shall mean a set of transmission equipment and in case of necessity commutation equipment and other resources which enable the provision of telecommunications.

2. "Public telecommunication network" shall mean a telecommunication network used fully or partially for the provision of public telecommunication services and/or for the realisation of telecommunications to an unlimited circle of users.

3. "Individual telecommunication network" shall mean a telecommunication network designed for the realisation of telecommunications in a non-commercial manner, for personal needs. The use for the personal needs is present, where the private network is not used as the means for providing telecommunication services.

4. "Cable network for distribution of radio- and television programs" shall mean a public telecommunication cable-based network, designed for the provision and distribution of radio and television signals

5. "Fixed public telephone network" shall mean a public telecommunication network for transferring voice and sound information, with the width of frequency band of 3100 Hz, the terminal points of which are geographically fixed, and which supports voice telephony, facsimile messages and data transfer through modems of at least 2400 bit/s speed.

6. "Mobile network" shall mean a telecommunication network, where the end points are not geographically fixed.

7. "Terminal point of the network" shall mean the physical point in which the user gets access to the public telecommunication network. The location of the terminal point shall be determined by the Commission, and it represents the boundary of the public telecommunication network for the purposes of regulation.

8. "Interconnection" shall mean physical and/or logical connection of telecommunication networks, belonging to one and the same or to different operators, in such a manner, that the users connected to one of these networks, obtain the possibility to access the users connected to the same or the other networks, or to telecommunication services offered through these other networks.

9. "Rented lines" shall mean telecommunication equipment through which a transparent transfer capacity between termination points of the network is ensured, and which do not include commutation on demand – commutation functions, controlled by the user as part of the letting the lines on rent.

10. "Telecommunication service" shall mean performance of telecommunications in commercial manner.

11. "Public telecommunication services" shall mean telecommunication services designed for an unlimited circle of users accessible by the general public.

12. "Voice telephone service" shall mean a public telecommunication service for direct transfer of speech in real time over any public telecommunication network, using commutation and/or routing regardless of the technology used for transfer, which enables an end-user that is connected to a terminal point to communicate with another user connected to another terminal point.

13. "Fixed voice telephone service" shall mean a voice telephone service with defined quality over any fixed telecommunication network realised between fixed terminal points of this network.

14. "Telephone information services" shall mean telecommunication services enabling the calling end user to obtain information about the telephone number of a subscriber through submitted data for individualisation of the subscriber – name, and if necessary, address.

15. "Services for emergency calls" shall mean unpaid telecommunication services enabling telecommunication access of every user to the "Emergency Medical Assistance", "Police" and "Fire and accident safety" services.

16. "Terminal telecommunication equipment" shall mean a device, allowing the performing of telecommunications, or an element of the given device, designed for direct or indirect connection in any manner to the terminal points of the telecommunication network.

17. "Public payphone" shall mean a telephone devices accessible to the public, the use of which is paid by coins, chips, debit/credit cards or pre-paid cards.

18. "Limited resource" shall mean a resource, limited due to natural phenomena or to technical reasons, such as the numbers from the National Numbering Plan, the radio-frequency spectrum, positions from the geo-stationary orbit, allocated to the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements.

19. "Cost orientation of the price of services" shall be present when the price of services include the costs made for their provision, including the price of the invested capital and an acceptable profit according to the Law of the Corporate Income Tax.

20. "Net losses" shall mean difference between the expenses of the operator, obligated to provide universal service, and the expenses without obligation to provide universal service, plus revenues from the provision of universal service and the advantages resulting from the obligation to provide universal service shall be taken into account.

21. "Radio equipment" shall mean a device (product) or part thereof for the provision of telecommunications through emission or emission and reception of radio waves, using the spectrum allotted for ground or space radio messages.

22. "Radio-frequency spectrum" shall mean a spectrum of frequencies within the radio-frequency range of 9 kHz to 3000 GHz.

23. "Radio-frequency band" shall mean a part of the radio-frequency spectrum, between two frequencies.

24. "Cryptographic key shall mean a method designed for concealing (coding) of exchanged information in a way, that it will remain intelligible only to the persons authorised therefore.

25. "Telecommunications for maritime and air search and rescue" and "Information on safety" shall mean all telecommunications, designated as such in the Regulations of the International Telecommunications Union.

26. "Ground radio broadcasting" shall mean emission from land-based radio stations of radio and/or television signals, intended to be received by the public.

27. "Telecommunication infrastructure" shall mean the technical infrastructure according to the Law of the spatial planning.

28. "Interface" shall mean a medium for physical and/or logical connection of systems, equipment or devices.

29. "Technical interface specification" shall mean specification in a document, setting out the type, quantity, form, and sequence of the interconnections and the way of interoperability between interfaces.

30. "Phone card" shall mean a type of payment instrument (pre-paid, debit or credit card), which is intended to serve as payment for telecommunication services provided through public payphones.

31. "Routing" shall mean the process of determination of alternative route or method for performing telecommunications between two terminal points of one ore more telecommunication networks.

32. "Number" shall mean a sequence of decimal digits, which uniformly identifies the termination point in the public network. The number contains information necessary for routing and/or billing of one call up to this termination point.

33. "Numbering space" shall mean the whole range of numbers, used in the telecommunications.

34. "Address" shall mean a sequence of digits and/or symbols, used for the identifying of a given specific or termination point of the network during the realisation of connection, used for routing, excluding Internet address.

35. "Name" shall mean a sequence of letters, digits and/or symbols identifying given element of a network and aimed to access to services excluding Internet name.

36. "Subscriber" shall mean an individual or a corporate body, party to a contract with the operator, providing telecommunication services, for provision of these services.

37. "User" shall mean individual or a corporate body, using or having declared intent to use telecommunication services.

38. "End users" shall mean users, including subscribers, using telecommunication service without providing telecommunication service through it.

39. (revoked – SG 19/05)

40. (revoked – SG 19/05)

41. "Call" shall mean every action of an end user intended to establish a connection with another end user or to obtain access to service, regardless of whether this action has been successful or not.

42. "Calling line identification" shall mean a service, enabling the subscriber called to receive a message about the number of the calling one prior to the establishment of connection.

43. "Interception" shall mean activity of obtaining access and providing the telecommunications to a given subscriber, as well as the data related to these calls, to the competent authorities under Art. 20, par. 1 of the Law of Special Intelligence Devices, performed on the basis of legal authorisation.

44. "Intercepting interface" shall mean an input-output software technical device of the telecommunication operator, where access to the intercepted telecommunications or to data, related to the call is provided. The intercepting interface can be in more than one fixed point.

45. "Radio service" shall mean a combination of technical and organisational rules during the transmission, emission and/or reception of communications through radio waves for different specific cases of performing of telecommunications.

46. "Full use in case of unbundled access" shall mean providing by an operator of access to subscriber’s line using the complete frequency band of a twisted copper pair for provision of services to entity different other than the operator.

47. "Shared use in case of unbundled access" shall mean providing access to the subscriber’s line with the purpose of using the part of its frequency band other than the part designated for voice transfer, whereas the operator providing unbundled access to the subscriber’s line shall have the technical capacity to continue providing voice services over the same subscriber’s line

48. "Mobile network cell" shall mean the geographical area, covered by the radio signal of a base station of a mobile network, within the boundaries of which the mobile network subscribers have access to it.

49. "Price package for economy use" shall mean a package of prices including a reduction of the subscriber's fee and the price of the fixed voice telephone service, the latter over certain amount having higher price than the price of the same service, provided to the subscribers not using this package.

50. "Telecommunication facility with defence functions of the Bulgarian Telecommunications Company network" shall mean facility situated at different places of the telecommunication network built, including set of architectural-constructively protected telecommunication node, management station, connecting cable highways, communication lines and equipment that are components of the national security and defence system.

51. "Control over the management of a company; is present in case that an entity:

a) possesses, including through daughter company or by agreement with

other entity more than the half plus one of the votes at the General meeting of the company, or

b) can determine directly or indirectly more than the half of the Managing board of the company, or

c) can, in any other way, influence the decisions related to the telecommunication activity of the company.

52. "Repeated" shall mean a violation committed within one year from the coming into effect of the penal provision for the same type of violation.

53. "Systematic violation" is present when within two years three or more administrative violation of this law or of the by-laws for its implementation are committed.

54. "Substantial" is a violation impeding the achievement of the objectives under Art. 2 and in result negative effects on the normal functioning of the telecommunications market come or could come.

§ 2 (1) Operator having a substantial impact on the market of fixed public telecommunications networks and of fixed voice telephone services may provide telecommunications over cable network for broadcasting of radio and television programs only through an independent corporate body constituted to that purpose.

(2) The Bulgarian National Television and the Bulgarian National Radio shall provide their national and regional programs free of charge to operators realising telecommunications through cable telecommunication networks intended for the broadcasting of radio and television programs.

(3) The operators under para 2 shall broadcast the national and regional programs of the Bulgarian National Television and the Bulgarian National Radio through their networks free of charge.

TRANSITIONAL AND CONCLUDING PROVISIONS

§ 3. (1) This law revokes the law of the telecommunications (prom., SG 93/1998; amend., SG 26/1999, SG 10 and 64/2000, SG 34, 42, 96 and 112/2001 and No 45 and 120/2002), with exception of art. 19, art. 37, para 1, art. 116, para 3, item 3 and art. 119 which shall apply until December 31, 2003.

(2) The by-laws related to the implementation of the revoked Law of the telecommunications shall remain in force inasmuch as they do not contradict this law.

§ 4. (1) From January 1, 2004 the employees of the administration of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall receive an extra to their remuneration in the size of the percentage of the growth in the preceding year of branch "Communications", according to data of the National Institute of Statistics.

(2) The legal terms of relations of the civil servants in the administration of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall be settled under the conditions and by the order of art. 106, para 1, item 2 of the Law of the civil servant. The term of the advanced notices shall start running from the enactment of this law.

§ 5. (1) This law shall enter into force on the day of its promulgation in the State Gazette with exception of:

1. the provisions of art. 17, art. 40, para 1, art. 217, art. 221, para 2, art. 222, para 2 and art. 225 which shall enter into force on January 1, 2004;

2. the provision of art. 119, para 4, art. 121, para 2, 4 and 5, art. 140, para 6 and 9 and art. 216 – regarding the fixed voice telephone service, the interconnection, the provision of the service "rented lines" of the range of the minimal package, which shall enter into force three months from the enactment of this law;

3. the provisions of art. 95, para 2, art. 104 – art. 112, art. 130, 131, 133 and art. 158, item 2 which shall enter into force on January 1, 2005;

4. the provision of art. 156 which shall enter into force on January 1, 2007 regarding the operators of public mobile telecommunication networks;

5. the provision of art. 156, which shall enter into force on January 1, 2009 regarding the operators of public telecommunication fixed telephone networks.

(2) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall determine an operator having a substantial impact on the market of fixed public telephone networks and fixed voice telephone services and for providing the service "rented lines" within 6 months from the enactment of this law.

(3) Until the determination of the operator under para 2 as operator having a substantial impact on the market of fixed public telephone networks and fixed voice telephone services, and for providing the service "rented lines" shall be considered the operator who has carried out activities of a state monopoly on the grounds of the revoked Law of the telecommunications.

(4) The operator under para 3 shall submit the system of determining the expenses under art. 217, para 1 within one month from the enactment of this law, and the Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall take a decision within 14 days from its receipt.

§ 6. (1) The public telecommunication operators carrying out telecommunications through cable telecommunication networks for broadcasting radio and television programmes in settlement with over 3000 residents, who have created the networks by using the electric poles for low voltage up to 400 volts, shall lay them under the ground in underground technical conductors by January 1, 2007.

(2) The public telecommunication operators carrying out telecommunications through cable telecommunication networks for broadcasting radio and television programmes in settlements with up to 3000 residents shall have the right not to lay their networks underground in technical conductors.

(3) The operators under para 1 and 2 shall create their networks in compliance with the requirements for safety.

§ 7. (1) The started procedures for issuance of individual licences or for registration under a class licence shall be concluded in compliance with the provisions of this law.

(2) The issued individual licences and certificates for registration under a class licence under the revoked Law of the telecommunications shall retain their validity.

(3) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall bring the licences under para 2 in compliance with the requirements of this law within 9 months from its enactment.

(4) In the cases of para 3 licence fees shall not be paid.

§ 8. (1) The operators who, by the enactment of this law, have been carrying out telecommunication activity on the grounds of an individual licence, and this law determines that this activity is carried out on the grounds of a registration under a class licence, shall obtain certificates for registration by the Commission for Regulation of the Communications within one month from the promulgation of the class licence in the State Gazette.

(2) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall issue the class licence under para 1 within three months from the enactment of this law.

(3) The operators under para 1 shall continue their activity in compliance with the issued individual licences not paying, considering from the enactment of this law, the respective instalment for the licence fees for 2003.

(4) On obtaining the certificate under para 1 the operators shall pay a registration fee.

§ 9. (1) The telecommunications carried out under a free regime according to the revoked Law of the telecommunications shall continue to be carried out freely if they meet the requirements of art. 48.

(2) In the event that the persons carrying out telecommunications under para 1 are subject to the provision of art. 49 they shall be obliged to undertake the necessary actions for issuance of an individual licence or for registration under a class licence within 6 months from the enactment of this law.

(3) The Commission for Regulation of the Communications shall issue, by July 1, 2004, the licence or the certificate of registration under para 2.

§ 10. (1) The Bulgarian Telecommunication Company shall be obliged to provide the universal telecommunication service without compensation for the net losses from its provision by December 31, 2004.

(2) Within three years from the enactment of this law the telecommunication sites of defence designation and the installed capacities under art. 185, para 1 shall be separated from the telecommunication network of the Bulgarian Telecommunication Company by an order determined by the Council of Ministers.

(3) The resources for the separation under para 2 shall be provided by the state budget, the Bulgarian Telecommunication Company and by other sources under conditions determined by an act of the Council of Ministers.

(4) The individual telecommunication sites with defence designation and the installed capacities under para 2 shall be used under conditions and by an order determined by the Council of Ministers.

§ 11. The members of the Commission for Regulation of the Communications, by the moment of the enactment of this law, shall complete their mandate according to the requirements of § 72, para 2 of the transitional and concluding provisions of the Law of amendment and supplement of the Law of the telecommunications (SG 112/2001).

§ 12. (new – SG 19/05) Everywhere in the law the words "of non military character" shall be deleted.

The law was adopted by the 39th National Assembly on September 23, 2003 and was affixed with the official seal of the National Assembly.
