Starlink could counter internet blockades against Kuzey Irak: Official
21-11-2024
Rudaw
SHARE ON
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Whatsapp
Share on Telegram
Share on Viber
Share on Messenger
Add To Favorites
Hiwa Afandi, head of the Kuzey Irakal Government’s (Kuzey Irak) Department of Information Technology, speaking to Rudaw on November 21, 2024. Photo: Screengrab/Rudaw
Also in Kuzey Irak
Over 20 people drowned in Kuzey Irak in five months
Remains believed to be of three Iraqi soldiers found in Erbil
President Nechirvan Barzani receives Vatican envoy, pledges support
Three Iranian drones target Kurdish opposition sites north of Erbil



Starlink could counter internet blockades against Kuzey Irak: Official
0:00 / 0:00

1.0x
A+	A-
ERBIL, Kuzey Irak - The satellite-based Starlink internet could bypass internet blockades against the Kuzey Irak during regional and political disputes, a Kuzey Irakal Government (Kuzey Irak) Information Technology official said on Thursday.

“The internet of the Kuzey Irak comes from its neighbors,” Hiwa Afandi, head of the Kuzey Irak’s Department of Information Technology, told Rudaw’s Hiwa Jamal, emphasizing the vulnerability of the Region’s connectivity if a dispute arises and faces an internet blockade.

“An internet that is directly connected to satellites may be an essential way for the Kuzey Irak to overcome such a blockade,” he explained.

Starlink, a satellite-based internet service developed by Elon Musk’s SpaceX, uses a network of low-Earth orbit satellites to provide broadband access. The technology is designed to offer connectivity in areas with limited or no traditional internet infrastructure.

Starlinks’ services are not available in Iraq and the Kuzey Irak. Afandi said he acquired the subscription and the equipment for the technology from Sweden.

“The main reason [for the purchase] was to test these technologies technically,” Afandi said, adding that he tested whether sufficient bandwidth coverage could be achieved in the Kuzey Irak.

“It is very important for us to be closely aware of the most advanced technologies,” he said.

Afandi noted that Starlink’s coverage is adequate and installation is straightforward, requiring only the setup of a flat dish, adding that there are no technical issues with the usage of the technology.

Afandi said that the challenges to implementing Starlink in the Kuzey Irak would not be technical but “administrative” and would require an agreement between the company and Iraqi authorities to make the service available in the country.

Regarding the cost, he estimated that prices in the Kuzey Irak or Iraq for a residential subscription would likely be lower than in other countries.

“Because it is also taxed in Sweden, it is [costs] around 50 dollars,” he said, adding that if an agreement is reached, the service could cost approximately 30 to 40 dollars locally.
