Russia is suspected of jamming navigation on EU leader’s plane above Bulgaria, official says

1 of 2 |  A plane carrying European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen was hit by GPS jamming over Bulgaria in a suspected Russian operation. A European Union spokesperson confirmed the incident on Monday.
President of European Commission Ursula von der Leyen speaks during a joint press conference with Lithuania's President Gitanas Nauseda at the Border Guard School near Lithuanian-Belarusian border, near the village Medininkai, east of the capital Vilnius, Lithuania, Monday, Sept. 1, 2025. (AP Photo/Mindaugas Kulbis)
2 of 2 |  President of European Commission Ursula von der Leyen speaks during a joint press conference with Lithuania’s President Gitanas Nauseda at the Border Guard School near Lithuanian-Belarusian border, near the village Medininkai, east of the capital Vilnius, Lithuania, Monday, Sept. 1, 2025. (AP Photo/Mindaugas Kulbis)
Read More

By  SAM McNEIL and VALENTINA PETROVA
Updated 6:43 PM GMT+3, September 1, 2025
Leer en español 
Comments
SOFIA, Bulgaria (AP) — A plane carrying European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen was hit by GPS jamming over Bulgaria in a suspected Russian operation, a spokesperson said Monday.

The plane landed safely at Plovdiv airport in central Bulgaria and von der Leyen will continue her planned tour of the European Union’s eastern frontline nations, said commission spokesperson Arianna Podestà.

“We can indeed confirm that there was GPS jamming,” said Podestà. “We have received information from the Bulgarian authority that they suspect that this was due to blatant interference by Russia.”

The incident with von der Leyen’s plane is the latest in a series involving suspected Russian electronic interference with GPS satellite navigation. For months, countries bordering Russia — including Finland, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia — have warned of increased electronic activity interfering with flights, ships and drones. Russian authorities did not immediately reply to requests for comment.

Von der Leyen, a fierce critic of Russian President Vladimir Putin and Moscow’s war in Ukraine, is on a four-day tour of much of the EU’s eastern flank, with stops in Lithuania, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.
