Syria: Authorities Threaten Social Media Users and Confiscate Starlink Devices
Freedom of Expression HTS Starlink

Written by
SMEX
Published on
11 Mar 2025
 Copy link
 
 
Since the fall of the regime in Syria last December, the new government has issued statements about mechanisms to “develop” telecommunications, internet services, and social media.

Three months following a dramatic shift in Syria’s landscape, how is the situation today regarding the telecommunications sector, internet access, and online freedom of expression?

Intelligence Directorate Threatens Social Media Users

Anas al-Khattab, head of the General Intelligence Directorate, has issued threats against anyone who uses social media platforms to incite opposition to the new Syrian army or support remnants of the old regime. He considers such actions a “direct target for the General Security Directorate and the Ministry of Defense.”

In his statement, al-Khattab added: “My message to our people on social media is to save and document any information about anyone who encourages the killing of brothers in the security forces or incites violence.”

This escalation poses a serious threat to people’s security and safety, especially since charges like “incitement” are vague and open to interpretation. This rhetoric does not only lead to physical harm and persecution, but it could also create significant self-censorship and restriction on freedom of expression in the country.

Syria’s New Authorities Seize Starlink Devices

The Syrian Ministry of Communications and Information Technology confiscated 55 Wi-Fi broadcasters and Starlink satellite internet devices, claiming they threatened the “national revenue” of the ministry and caused “damage to the frequency spectrum of the Syrian Telecommunications.”

Telecommunications experts and activists have criticized this move, noting that despite the need to regulate internet distribution, this particular incident disconnected over 5,000 people without providing any alternatives, especially amidst the current unrest in the country.

Turkish Authorities Arrest Individual for Insulting Erdoğan Through Posts in Syrian Territories

The Turkish Ministry of the Interior announced the arrest of an individual in Syria, who was then brought to Turkey, for posts deemed “offensive” to the Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.

According to the ministry’s statement, the public prosecutor in Istanbul issued an arrest warrant, and the arrest was made in Syria with the support of the General Directorate of Intelligence and Security, the General Security Services, and the Intelligence Directorate in Hatay. The ministry also stated that the Cybercrime Combatting Branch has started legal proceedings against 97 accounts that shared the accused’s content, after a court order blocked these accounts.

Syrian Telecommunications Grants Licenses to 5 Internet Companies

Hussein al-Masri, the Syrian Minister of Communications and Information Technology, announced that the ministry has licensed five internet service providers, with plans to grant licenses to another 20 companies soon.

Al-Masri emphasized the ministry’s commitment to attracting private sector investments by creating a regulatory and legislative environment conducive to providing high-quality and affordable internet services.

However, the minister’s statements contradict recent government actions, such as seizing Wi-Fi and Starlink devices and suddenly cutting off internet access to thousands. How does this align with the ministry’s intent to create a stimulating regulatory and legislative environment and ensure the Syrian people receive the services they deserve?

Applications Still Blocked in Syria

Syria has faced internet restrictions for many years. In addition to the stringent government censorship imposed by the previous regime, many global companies have chosen to block their services in the country. The U.S. prohibits American companies from providing software, services, and technology to Syria without specific and limited authorization.

The blocked applications include:

Entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video
Virtual meeting applications: Zoom
Artificial intelligence tools: ChatGPT
App stores and services: YouTube Premium, developer support services, and some Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), with challenges accessing Google Play Store.
Strict restrictions on Amazon and Apple services: Amazon and Apple impose strict restrictions for use in Syria. Apple’s App Store and Amazon’s e-commerce and cloud storage services are unavailable in Syria.
Ride-sharing and transportation apps: Uber
Food delivery applications: Deliveroo, Glovo, and Foodpanda
Reports: ‘Deadly’ Disinformation in Syria

Disinformation and electronic violence in various forms pose threats to democracy and justice, as observed over decades through continuous research and documentation in the digital space.

The report “Deadly Disinformation” by The Syria Campaign discusses the damage caused by the spread of misleading information about Syria. A complementary report, “The Silencing Effect and the Effect of Silence,” addresses how cyber abuse compels people to practice suffocating self-censorship.

Recent SMEX Articles about Syria:

Syria’s Telecom Sector: Between Neglect and Reconstruction

Disinformation fuels sectarian unrest in Syria [Opinion]

Main Image Credit: AFP

Related

